Benzonatate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Benzonatate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682640.html
Benzonatate
pronounced as (ben zoe' na tate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Benzonatate is used to relieve cough. Benzonatate is in a class of medications called antitussives (cough suppressants). It works by reducing the cough reflex in the lungs and air passages.
How should this medicine be used?
Benzonatate comes as a liquid-filled capsule and a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken three times a day as needed. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take benzonatate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules and liquid-filled capsules whole; do not break, dissolve, cut, crush, suck or chew them. If the medication is released in the mouth, it may make the mouth numb and cause choking. Do not eat or drink if you feel numbness or tingling of your mouth, tongue, throat, or face. If feelings of numbness or tingling continue or get worse, get medical help right away.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking benzonatate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to benzonatate, procaine (Novocain), tetracaine (in Synera),any other medications, or any of the ingredients in benzonatate capsules. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking benzonatate, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking benzonatate.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually taken as needed. If you are taking benzonatate regularly and you miss a dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Benzonatate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
constipation
drowsiness
headache
dizziness
stuffy nose
feeling chilly
burning in the eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash or hives
itching
tightening of the throat
difficulty breathing or swallowing
numbness of the chest
confusion
hallucinations (seeing or hearing things that do not exist)
Benzonatate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed. It is very important to store this medication in a closed child-proof container and to keep it out of reach of children. Children may be attracted to the shape and look of the liquid-filled capsules and may die if they swallow the medication. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
If benzonatate is taken accidentally, call for medical help immediately. Symptoms of overdose can occur rapidly (within 15–20 minutes of taking medication) and death in children has been reported within an hour. These symptoms may include the following:
restlessness
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
confusion
seizures
unconsciousness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tessalon
®
Zonatuss
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page