Oxybutynin Transdermal Patch: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Oxybutynin Transdermal Patch
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604016.html
Oxybutynin Transdermal Patch
pronounced as (ox i byoo' ti nin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Oxybutynin transdermal patches are used to treat an overactive bladder (a bladder condition that causes sudden urges to urinate that may be hard to control). Oxybutynin is in a class of medications called antimuscarinics. It works by relaxing the bladder muscles.
How should this medicine be used?
Transdermal oxybutynin comes as a patch to apply to the skin. Apply twice each week (every 3–4 days). Apply transdermal oxybutynin on the same 2 days of the week every week. To help you remember to apply your patches on the right days, mark the calendar on the back of your package of medication.
Use transdermal oxybutynin exactly as directed. Do not apply the patches more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You can apply oxybutynin patches on your stomach, hips, or buttocks, but not on your waistline. Choose an area that is comfortable, not rubbed by tight clothing, and covered by clothing to protect it from the sun. Do not put the patch on the same spot more than once a week. Avoid putting it on skin that has cuts, rashes, folds, or that’s oily or irritated. Don’t use lotion, oil, or powder on the skin before applying the patch. Make sure the skin is clean and dry.
Do not cut or divide the patch into pieces. Do not use if it is damaged.
Keep the oxybutynin patch on until it is time to change it. If the patch loosens or falls off, try to press it back in place with your fingers. If the patch cannot be pressed back on, discard it and apply a fresh patch to a different area. Still change the patch on your regular schedule.
You may bathe, swim, shower, or exercise with an oxybutynin patch on. Avoid rubbing the patch and do not soak in a hot tub for a long period of time while wearing a patch.
Transdermal oxybutynin controls the symptoms of overactive bladder but does not cure the condition. Continue to take transdermal oxybutynin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking transdermal oxybutynin without talking to your doctor.
To use the patches, follow these steps:
Open the protective pouch and remove the patch.
Peel the first piece of liner off the sticky side of the patch. A second strip of liner should remain stuck to the patch.
Press the patch firmly onto your skin with the sticky side down. Be careful not to touch the sticky side with your fingers.
Bend the patch in half and use your fingertips to roll the remaining part of the patch onto your skin. The second liner strip should fall off of the patch when you do this.
Press firmly on the surface of the patch to attach it tightly to your skin.
When you are ready to remove a patch, peel it off slowly and gently. Fold the patch in half with the sticky sides together and discard it safely, in a way that is out of reach of children and pets. Children and pets can be harmed if they chew on, play with, or wear used patches.
Wash the area that was under the patch with mild soap and warm water to remove any residue. If necessary, you can use baby oil or a medical adhesive removal pad to remove residue that will not come off with soap and water. Do not use alcohol, nail polish remover, or other solvents.
Apply a new patch to a different area immediately by following steps 1–5.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using transdermal oxybutynin,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements and herbal products you are taking while using transdermal oxybutynin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had narrow angle glaucoma (a serious eye condition that may cause vision loss), any condition that stops your bladder from emptying completely, or any condition that causes your stomach to empty slowly or incompletely. Your doctor may tell you not to use oxybutynin patches.
tell your doctor if you or any of your family members have or have ever had any type of blockage in the bladder or digestive system; gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD, a condition in which stomach acid flows back up into the esophagus and cause pain); myasthenia gravis (a nerve problem that makes muscles weak); ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the large intestine and rectum); benign prostatic hypertrophy (BPH, enlargement of the prostate); or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using transdermal oxybutynin, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using transdermal oxybutynin.
you should know that transdermal oxybutynin may make you drowsy and may blur your vision. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this medication.
you should know that transdermal oxybutynin may make it harder for your body to cool down. Avoid extreme heat, and call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment if you have fever or other signs of heat stroke such as dizziness, upset stomach, headache, confusion, and fast pulse afterb eing in the heat.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Remove the old patch and apply a new patch to a different spot as soon as you remember it. Replace the new patch on your next scheduled patch change day. Do not apply two patches to make up for a missed dose and never wear more than one patch at a time.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Transdermal oxybutynin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
redness, burning, or itching in the place where you applied a patch
headache, dizziness, confusion, drowsiness
dry mouth
diarrhea
constipation
blurred vision
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, hives, swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat
hoarseness, difficulty breathing or swallowing
confusion, hallucinations
frequent, urgent, or painful urination
Transdermal oxybutynin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the patches in their protective pouches and do not open a pouch until you are ready to apply the patch. Store this medication at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
flushing
fever
dry skin
extreme tiredness
irregular heartbeat
vomiting
inability to urinate
memory loss, confusion, semi-awake state
restlessness, agitation
dilated pupils
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Oxytrol
®
Oxytrol for Women
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page