Glycopyrrolate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Glycopyrrolate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602014.html
Glycopyrrolate
pronounced as (glye koe pye' roe late)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Glycopyrrolate is used in combination with other medications to treat ulcers in adults and children 12 years of age and older. Glycopyrrolate (Cuvposa) is used to reduce saliva and drooling in children between 3 and16 years of age that have certain medical conditions that cause drooling. Glycopyrrolate is in a class of medications called anticholinergics. It decreases stomach acid and saliva production by blocking the activity of a certain natural substance in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Glycopyrrolate comes as a tablet and solution (liquid) to take by mouth. For the treatment of ulcers, the tablet is usually taken 2 or 3 times a day. To reduce saliva and drooling in children with certain medical conditions, the solution is usually taken 3 times a day. Take the solution on an empty stomach (at least 1 hour before or 2 hours after a meal). Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take glycopyrrolate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start your child on a low dose of the solution and gradually increase the dose over a 4-week period.
If you are giving the solution to a child, do not use a household spoon to measure the dose. Use an oral syringe that is made especially for measuring liquid medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking glycopyrrolate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to glycopyrrolate, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in glycopyrrolate tablets or solution. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking extended-release (long-acting) potassium chloride tablets or capsules. Your doctor may tell you not to take glycopyrrolate if you are taking this medication.
some medications should not be taken with glycopyrrolate. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with glycopyrrolate. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting glycopyrrolate with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking glycopyrrolate, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist. .
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glaucoma; difficulty urinating; a blockage or narrowing of your stomach or intestines, paralytic ileus (condition in which digested food does not move through the intestines) toxic megacolon (a serious or life-threatening widening of the intestine), or myasthenia gravis (a disorder of the nervous system that causes muscle weakness). Your doctor may tell you not to take glycopyrrolate.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had enlargement of the prostate, ulcerative colitis (a condition which causes swelling and sores in the lining of the colon [large intestine] and rectum), overactive thyroid, high blood pressure, heart failure, irregular or rapid heartbeats, coronary artery disease, hiatal hernia with reflux, disorders of the nervous system, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking glycopyrrolate, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking glycopyrrolate.
you should know that glycopyrrolate may make you drowsy or cause blurred vision. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that glycopyrrolate reduces the body's ability to cool off by sweating. Avoid being in hot or very warm temperatures. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: lack of sweating in hot weather; hot, red skin; decreased alertness; loss of consciousness; fast, weak pulse; fast, shallow breathing; or fever.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Glycopyrrolate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dry mouth
blurred vision
vision problems
loss of taste
headache
nervousness
confusion
drowsiness
weakness
dizziness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
upset stomach
nausea
vomiting
constipation
bloated feeling
nasal congestion
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
diarrhea
rash
hives
difficulty breathing or swallowing
difficulty urinating or unable to urinate
Glycopyrrolate may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cuvposa
®
Robinul
®
¶
Robinul
®
Forte
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page