Cilostazol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cilostazol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601038.html
Cilostazol
pronounced as (sil oh' sta zol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Medications similar to cilostazol caused an increased risk of death in patients with congestive heart failure (condition in which the heart is unable to pump enough blood to the other parts of the body). Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had congestive heart failure. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take cilostazol.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking cilostazol.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cilostazol is used to reduce the symptoms of intermittent claudication (pain in the legs that worsens when walking and improves when resting that is caused by narrowing of the blood vessels that supply blood to the legs). Cilostazol is in a class of medications called platelet-aggregation inhibitors (antiplatelet medications). It works by improving blood flow to the legs.
How should this medicine be used?
Cilostazol comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day, at least 30 minutes before or 2 hours after breakfast and dinner. Take cilostazol at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on the prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take cilostazol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Cilostazol controls the symptoms of intermittent claudication but does not cure it. Although you may notice improvements in 2 to 4 weeks, it may take up to 12 weeks before you notice the full benefit (increased walking distance) of cilostazol. Continue taking cilostazol even if you feel well. Do not stop taking cilostazol without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cilostazol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cilostazol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in cilostazol. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking cilostazol. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription product may interact with cilostazol: omeprazole (Prilosec). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking cilostazol. Do not start this medication while taking cilostazol without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have bleeding ulcers (sores in the lining of the stomach or small intestine that are bleeding), bleeding in the brain, bleeding from any other part of your body, a low number of platelets in your blood, or any other condition that causes severe bleeding. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take cilostazol.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking cilostazol, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cilostazol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
diarrhea
dizziness
heartburn
nausea
stomach pain
muscle pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fast or irregular heartbeat
unusual bleeding or bruising
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
severe headache
dizziness
fainting
diarrhea
fast or irregular heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Pletal
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page