Brinzolamide Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Brinzolamide Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601233.html
Brinzolamide Ophthalmic
pronounced as (bryn xoe' la mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Brinzolamide ophthalmic is used to treat glaucoma, and other conditions that cause increased pressure in the eye that could lead to vision loss. Brinzolamide is in a class of medications called carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. It works to decrease pressure in the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Brinzolamide ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid; eye drops) to place in the eye(s). It is usually used three times a day. Use brinzolamide ophthalmic around the same times every day.
Use brinzolamide ophthalmic exactly as directed. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Brinzolamide controls eye pressure but does not cure it. Continue to use brinzolamide eye drops even if you feel well. Do not stop using brinzolamide eye drops without talking to your doctor.
Shake the eye drops well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
To use the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
If you are to use more than one drop in the same eye, wait at least 5 minutes before instilling the next drop.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using brinzolamide eye drops,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be used with brinzolamide ophthalmic. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting brinzolamide ophthalmic with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using brinzolamide ophthalmic, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
if you are using another medication in the eye, use it 10 minutes before or 10 minutes after you use brinzolamide eye drops.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
if you get an eye injury or infection, call your doctor to see if you should still use the same eye drop bottle.
tell your doctor if you wear soft contact lenses. Wait at least 15 minutes after using the medicine to put in soft contact lenses.
use caution when driving or operating machinery because vision may be blurred after just after using the drops.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Brinzolamide eye drops may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
blurry vision
bitter, sour, or unusual taste after instilling the drops
dry eyes
feeling that something is in your eye
headache
runny nose
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
itching eyes
redness or swelling of eyes, lips, tongue, or skin
discharge from eyes
eye pain
itching, rash, hives, or skin changes
difficulty breathing or swallowing
sore throat, fever
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will order certain eye tests to check your response to brinzolamide eye drops.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Azopt
®
SImbrinza
®
(as a combination of brimonidine, brinzolamide)
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page