Vonoprazan, Clarithromycin, and Amoxicillin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Vonoprazan, Clarithromycin, and Amoxicillin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622051.html
Vonoprazan, Clarithromycin, and Amoxicillin
pronounced as (von oh′ pra zan) (kla rith' roe mye sin) (a mox i sil' in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin are used to treat and prevent the return of ulcers (sores in the lining of the stomach or intestine) caused by a certain type of bacteria (
H. pylori
). Vonoprazan is in a class of medications called potassium-competitive acid blockers (PCAB). Clarithromycin and amoxicillin are in a class of medications called antibiotics. Vonoprazan works by decreasing the amount of acid made in the stomach. Clarithromycin and amoxicillin work by stopping the growth of the bacteria that may cause ulcers. Antibiotics will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections.
How should this medicine be used?
Vonoprazan comes as a tablet, clarithromycin comes as a tablet, and amoxicillin comes as a capsule, all to be taken by mouth. These medications are usually taken with or without food twice a day, 12 hours apart, for 14 days. To help you take the right number of capsules and tablets at each dose, the medication is packaged in dosing cards. Each dosing card contains all of the medication needed for both daily doses. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take the medication exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Take vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking antibiotics too soon your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
If your condition does not improve or gets worse, call your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to vonoprazan; clarithromycin; amoxicillin; penicillin antibiotics; cephalosporin antibiotics such as cefaclor, cefadroxil, cefdinir, cefixime, cefpodoxime, cefprozil, cefuroxime, and cephalexin; other antibiotics such as azithromycin or erythromycin; any other medications; or any of the ingredients in vonoprazan tablets, clarithromycin tablets, or amoxicillin capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Some medications should not be taken with vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping or changing any medications while taking vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin, get the advice of your healthcare provider.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin. Do not start this medication while taking vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin without discussing with your healthcare provider
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had jaundice (yellowing of the skin or eyes) or other liver problems while taking clarithromycin. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had QT prolongation (an irregular heart rhythm that can lead to fainting, loss of consciousness, seizures, or sudden death) or an irregular heartbeat; low levels of potassium or magnesium in your blood; mononucleosis (a virus; also called 'mono'); myasthenia gravis (a disease that causes muscle weakness); or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin, call your doctor. Vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while taking vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin and for 2 days after your final dose.
you should know that vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin may make you dizzy, confused, or disoriented. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose (one vonoprazan tablet, one clarithromycin tablet, and two amoxicillin capsules) as soon as you remember it. However, if it is within 4 hours of your next scheduled dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
stomach pain
change in ability to taste food
headache
sore throat
vaginal itching and/or discharge
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
blistering or peeling skin
rash; hives; itching; swelling of the lips, face, or tongue; shortness of breath; difficulty breathing or swallowing
yellow eyes or skin, loss of appetite, dark urine; itching, abdominal pain, unexplained bruising or bleeding, or loss of appetite
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
severe vomiting that may occur 1 to 4 hours after you take vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin
difficulty urinating or decreased urination
cloudy or bloody urine
Vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
stomach pain
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
difficulty urinating
cloudy or bloody urine
decreased urination
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking vonoprazan, clarithromycin, and amoxicillin.
If you are diabetic, use Clinistix
®
or TesTape
®
(not Clinitest
®
) to test your urine for sugar while taking this medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Voquezna
®
Triple Pak
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page