Midazolam: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Midazolam
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a609003.html
Midazolam
pronounced as (mid' ay zoe lam)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Midazolam may cause serious or life-threatening breathing problems such as shallow, slowed, or temporarily stopped breathing. Your child should only receive this medication in a hospital or doctor's office that has the equipment that is needed to monitor his or her heart and lungs and to provide life-saving medical treatment quickly if his or her breathing slows or stops. Your child's doctor or nurse will watch your child closely after he or she receives this medication to make sure that he or she is breathing properly. Tell your child's doctor if your child has a severe infection or if he or she has or has ever had any airway or breathing problems or heart or lung disease. Tell your child's doctor and pharmacist if your child is taking any of the following medications: antidepressants; barbiturates such as secobarbital (Seconal
®
); droperidol (Inapsine
®
); medications for anxiety, mental illness, or seizures; narcotic medications for pain such as fentanyl (Actiq
®
, Duragesic
®
, Sublimaze
®
, others), morphine (Avinza
®
, Kadian
®
, MS Contin
®
, others), and meperidine (Demerol
®
); sedatives; sleeping pills; or tranquilizers.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Midazolam is given to children before medical procedures or before anesthesia for surgery to cause drowsiness, relieve anxiety, and prevent any memory of the event. Midazolam is in a class of medications called benzodiazepines. It works by slowing activity in the brain to allow relaxation and sleep.
How should this medicine be used?
Midazolam comes as a syrup to take by mouth. It is usually given as a single dose by a doctor or nurse before a medical procedure or surgery.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your child's doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before your child receives midazolam,
tell your child's doctor and pharmacist if he or she is allergic to midazolam, any other medications, or cherries.
some medications should not be taken with midazolam. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with midazolam. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting midazolam with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking midazolam, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with midazolam: cimetidine (Tagamet
®
); St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking midazolam. Do not start any of these medications while taking midazolam without discussing with your healthcare provider
tell your child's doctor if your child has glaucoma. Your child's doctor may decide not to give your child midazolam.
tell your child's doctor if your child has or has ever had kidney or liver disease.
tell your child's doctor if your child is or may be pregnant, or is breast-feeding.
you should know that midazolam may make your child very drowsy and may affect his or her memory, thinking, and movements. Do not allow your child to ride a bicycle, drive a car, or do other activities that require him or her to be fully alert for at least 24 hours after receiving midazolam and until the effects of the medication have worn off. Watch your child carefully to be sure that he or she does not fall while walking during this time.
you should know that alcohol can make the side effects of midazolam worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not let your child eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Midazolam may cause side effects. Tell your child's doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
rash
Some side effects can be serious. If your child experiences any of these symptoms, call his or her doctor immediately:
agitation
restlessness
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
stiffening and jerking of the arms and legs
aggression
slow or irregular heartbeat
Midazolam may cause other side effects. Call your child's doctor if your child has any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
drowsiness
confusion
problems with balance and movement
slowed breathing and heartbeat
loss of consciousness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your child's doctor.
Ask your child's pharmacist or doctor if you have any questions about midazolam.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Versed
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page