Testosterone Buccal: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Testosterone Buccal
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603034.html
Testosterone Buccal
pronounced as (tes tos' ter one)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Testosterone buccal has been discontinued in the US. Because this drug is no longer available in the US market, the material in this monograph is no longer updated. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturer's labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Testosterone buccal systems are used to treat symptoms of low testosterone in adult men who have hypogonadism (a condition in which the body does not produce enough natural testosterone). Testosterone is used only for men with low testosterone levels caused by certain medical conditions, including disorders of the testicles, pituitary gland, (a small gland in the brain), or hypothalamus (a part of the brain) that cause hypogonadism. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your testosterone levels to see if they are low before you begin to use testosterone buccal. Testosterone should not be used treat the symptoms of low testosterone in men who have low testosterone due to aging ('age-related hypogonadism'). Testosterone is in a class of medications called androgenic hormones. Testosterone is a hormone produced by the body that contributes to the growth, development, and functioning of the male sexual organs and typical male characteristics. Testosterone buccal systems work by replacing testosterone that is normally produced by the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Buccal testosterone comes as a system (tablet shaped patch) to apply to the upper gum. It is usually applied twice a day around every 12 hours. To help you remember to apply testosterone buccal systems, apply them at about the same times each day. It may be convenient to apply the systems after you eat breakfast and brush your teeth, and after dinner. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Apply testosterone buccal systems exactly as directed. Do not apply more or fewer systems or apply the systems more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should apply testosterone buccal systems to the areas of your upper gum that are above the left and right incisors (the teeth just to the left and right of the two front teeth). Alternate sides at every dose so that you never apply a system to the same side two doses in a row.
Testosterone buccal systems only work when applied to the upper gum. Although the systems look like tablets, you should not chew or swallow them.
Testosterone buccal systems will soften and mold to the shape of your gum and will gradually release medication. However, they will not dissolve completely in your mouth and must be removed after 12 hours.
You may brush your teeth; use mouthwash; use tobacco products; chew gum; eat; and drink alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverages while you are wearing a testosterone buccal system. However, these activities may cause the system to fall off your gum. After you are finished the activity, check to be sure the system is still in place.
If your testosterone buccal system does not stick or falls off within 8 hours after you apply it, replace it with a new system immediately and apply your next dose at the regularly scheduled time. If your system falls off more than 8 hours after you apply it, apply a new system immediately and do not apply a new system at the regularly scheduled time. The replacement system will take the place of your next dose.
Your doctor may adjust your dose of testosterone depending on the amount of testosterone in your blood during your treatment.
Testosterone buccal systems may control your condition but will not cure it. Continue to use testosterone even if you feel well. Do not stop using testosterone without talking to your doctor. If you stop using testosterone, your symptoms may return.
To apply testosterone buccal systems, follow these steps:
Push one system out through the back of the blister card. Notice that one side of the system is flat and is marked with the company logo and the other side is curved.
Place the system on your fingertip with the flat side against your finger.
Gently press the curved side of the system against the proper area of your upper gum. Push the system as high up on your gum as possible.
Place your finger on the outside of your upper lip over the spot where you applied the testosterone buccal system. Press down on the spot for 30 seconds to help the system stick to your gum.
The testosterone buccal system should now be stuck to your gum. If it is stuck to your cheek, you may leave it in place. The system will still release medication properly when stuck to your cheek.
To remove testosterone buccal systems, follow these steps:
Gently slide the system to the front or back of your mouth to loosen it.
Slide the system down from your gum to a tooth. Be careful not to scratch your gum.
Remove the system from your mouth and discard it safely, so that it is out of the reach of children and pets. Children and pets can be harmed if they chew on or play with used systems.
Apply a new system following the directions above.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using testosterone buccal systems,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to testosterone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in testosterone buccal system. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using testosterone buccal systems. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have breast cancer or have or may have prostate cancer. Your doctor will probably tell you that you should not use testosterone buccal system.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH; an enlarged prostate), sleep apnea (a sleep disorder that causes breathing to stop for short periods during sleep), high levels of calcium in your blood, diabetes, or heart, kidney, liver, or lung disease.
you should know that testosterone buccal systems are only for use in adult men. Children, teenagers, and women should not use this medication. Testosterone may stop bone growth and cause precocious puberty (early puberty) in children and teenagers. Testosterone may cause deepening of voice, hair growth in unusual places, genital enlargement, decrease in breast size, male-pattern hair loss, and unusual menstrual cycles in women. If testosterone is used by women who are pregnant, may become pregnant, or are breastfeeding, it may harm the baby.
you should check your gums regularly while you are using this medication. Call your doctor if you notice any changes in your gums.
you should know that there have been reports of serious side effects in people who use testosterone at higher doses, along with other male sex hormone products, or in ways other than directed by a doctor. These side effects may include a heart attack, heart failure, or other heart problems; stroke and mini-stroke; liver disease; seizures; or mental health changes such as depression, mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood), aggressive or unfriendly behavior, hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist), or delusions (having strange thoughts or beliefs that have no basis in reality). People who use higher doses of testosterone than recommended by a doctor may also experience withdrawal symptoms such as depression, extreme tiredness, craving, irritability, restlessness, loss of appetite, inability to fall asleep or stay asleep, or a decreased sex drive, if they suddenly stop using testosterone buccal. Be sure to use testosterone buccal system exactly as directed by your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of using testosterone buccal systems if you are 65 years of age or older. Older men should not usually use testosterone, unless they have hypogonadism.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Remove the old testosterone buccal system and apply a new one as soon as you remember it. If you remember within 8 hours after the usual application time, keep the new system in place until your next scheduled application time. If you remember more than 8 hours after the usual application time, do not remove the new system at the next scheduled application time.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Testosterone buccal systems may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
irritation, redness, pain, tenderness, swelling, toughening, or blistering of gums
stinging or swelling of lips
unpleasant or bitter taste in mouth
difficulty tasting food
headache
acne
breast pain or enlargement
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
lower leg pain, swelling, warmth, or redness
shortness of breath
chest pain
difficulty breathing, especially at night
swelling of the hands, feet, and ankles
sudden unexplained weight gain
slow or difficult speech
dizziness or faintness
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
erections of the penis that happen too often or do not go away
difficulty urinating, weak urine flow, frequent urination, sudden need to urinate right away
vomiting
nausea
extreme tiredness
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark urine
Testosterone buccal systems may cause a decrease in the number of sperm (male reproductive cells) produced, especially if it is used at high doses. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication if you are a man and would like to have children.
Testosterone may increase the risk of developing prostate cancer. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication.
Testosterone buccal systems may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Store testosterone buccal systems in a safe place so that no one else can use it accidentally or on purpose. Keep track of how many systems are left so you will know if any are missing.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to testosterone buccal systems.
Before having any laboratory tests, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using testosterone buccal systems. This medication may affect the results of certain laboratory tests.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Testosterone buccal systems are a controlled substance. Prescriptions may be refilled only a limited number of times; ask your pharmacist if you have any questions.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Striant
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page