Malathion Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Malathion Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611010.html
Malathion Topical
pronounced as (mal'' a thye' on)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Malathion lotion is used to treat head lice (small insects that attach themselves to the skin) in adults and children 6 years of age and older. It should not be used in infants and children younger than 2 years of age. Malathion is in a class of medications called pediculicides. It works by killing lice.
How should this medicine be used?
Malathion comes as a lotion to apply to the scalp and hair. It is usually applied to the scalp and hair in one or sometimes two treatments. If live lice are seen 7 to 9 days after the first treatment then apply a second treatment of malathion lotion. Follow the directions on your prescription label or the package label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use malathion lotion exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient. Read these instructions carefully.
Malathion lotion should only be used on the hair and scalp. If you experience skin irritation, wash scalp and hair right away. If the irritation gets better, you can apply malathion lotion again. If you experience skin irritation again, call your doctor.
Avoid getting malathion lotion in your eyes. If malathion lotion gets in your eyes, flush them with water right away. If your eyes are still irritated after flushing with water, call your doctor or get medical help right away.
To use the lotion, follow these steps:
Be sure to keep your eyes closed during this treatment. You may need to have an adult help you apply the lotion.
Apply malathion lotion to dry hair and scalp area paying special attention to area behind your ears and at the back of your neck. Be sure to use enough lotion to cover the entire scalp area and hair thoroughly.
Allow hair to air dry and to remain uncovered. Malathion lotion is flammable. The lotion and wet hair should not be exposed to open flames or electric heat sources, including hair dryers or curlers. Do not smoke while applying lotion or while hair is wet.
Leave the lotion on your hair and scalp for 8 to 12 hours.
After 8 to 12 hours have passed, shampoo your hair and scalp with warm water in a sink. You should not use a shower or bathtub to rinse the lotion away because you do not want to get the lotion over the rest of your body.
You and anyone who helped you apply the lotion should wash your hands carefully after the application and rinsing steps.
Use a lice comb to remove the dead lice and nits (empty egg shells) after this treatment. You may also need to have an adult help you to do this.
If you see live lice on your head 7 to 9 days after treatment, repeat this entire process.
After using malathion lotion, sanitize all the clothing, underwear, pajamas, hats, sheets, pillowcases, and towels you have used recently. These items should be washed in very hot water or dry-cleaned. You should also wash combs, brushes, hairs clips and other personal care items in hot water.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using malathion lotion,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to malathion, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in malathion lotion. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical conditions or skin sensitivities.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using malathion lotion, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Malathion lotion may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
irritation of the skin or scalp area
stinging of the skin
Malathion lotion may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows malathion lotion, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
difficulty breathing
increased sweating
increased saliva
slow heart rate
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your malathion lotion. Your prescription for malathion lotion is probably not refillable. If you feel you need additional treatment, call your doctor.
Lice are generally spread by close head-to-head contact or from items which come in contact with your head. Do not share combs, brushes, towels, pillows, hats, scarves, or hair accessories. Be sure to check everyone in your immediate family for head lice if another family member is being treated for lice.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ovide
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page