Mesna: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Mesna
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613013.html
Mesna
pronounced as (mes' na)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Mesna is used to reduce the risk of hemorrhagic cystitis (a condition that causes inflammation of the bladder and can result in serious bleeding) in people who receive ifosfamide (a medication used for the treatment of cancer). Mesna is in a class of medications called cytoprotectants. It works by protecting the bladder against some of the harmful effects of certain chemotherapy medications.
How should this medicine be used?
Mesna comes as a tablet to take by mouth. The first dose of mesna is usually given as an injection into your vein at the same time as you receive your chemotherapy treatment. After that, your doctor may choose to continue your treatment with mesna tablets. It is usually given 2 and 6 hours after your chemotherapy treatment. Take mesna exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you vomit less than 2 hours after you take a dose of mesna tablets, call your doctor right away.
Drink at least 1 quart (4 cups; about 1 liter) of liquid daily while you are taking mesna tablets.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
Mesna is also sometimes used to reduce the risk of hemorrhagic cystitis in people who receive the chemotherapy drug cyclophosphamide. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking mesna,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to mesna, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in mesna tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an autoimmune disorder (conditions in which the immune system attacks healthy parts of the body and causes pain, swelling, and damage) such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, or nephritis (a type of kidney problem).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. Call your doctor right away for more instructions. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Mesna may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
constipation
loss of appetite or weight
diarrhea
abdominal pain
headache
tiredness
dizziness
hair loss
loss of strength and energy
fever
sore throat
cough
flushing
sensitivity of the skin to touch
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
pink or red colored urine
blood in urine
swelling of the face, arms, or legs
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
chest pain
fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
unusual bleeding or bruising
Mesna may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking mesna.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mesnex
®
Other names
Sodium 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate
Last Revised -
01/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page