Pantoprazole Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pantoprazole Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619034.html
Pantoprazole Injection
pronounced as (pan toe' pra zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pantoprazole injection is used as a short-term treatment to treat gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD; a condition in which backward flow of acid from the stomach causes heartburn and possible injury of the esophagus [the tube between the throat and stomach]) in people who have had damage to their esophagus and who are unable to take pantoprazole by mouth. It is also used to treat conditions where the stomach produces too much acid, such as Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (tumors in the pancreas and small intestine that caused increased production of stomach acid). Pantoprazole is in a class of medications called proton-pump inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of acid made in the stomach.
How should this medicine be used?
Pantoprazole injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and given intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. For the treatment of GERD, pantoprazole injection is usually given once a day for 7 to 10 days. For the treatment of conditions where the stomach produces too much acid, pantoprazole injection is usually given every 8 to 12 hours.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving pantoprazole injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pantoprazole, dexlansoprazole (Dexilant), esomeprazole (Nexium, in Vimovo), lansoprazole (Prevacid), omeprazole (Prilosec, in Talicia, in Zegerid), rabeprazole (AcipHex), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pantoprazole injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Some medications should not be taken with pantoprazole injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with pantoprazole injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting pantoprazole injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while receiving pantoprazole injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with pantoprazole injection: iron supplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start receiving pantoprazole injection. Do not start any of these medications while receiving pantoprazole injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a low level of zinc, magnesium, or calcium in your body; osteoporosis (a condition in which the bones become thin and weak and break easily); or an autoimmune disease (condition that develops when the immune system attacks healthy cells in the body by mistake) such as systemic lupus erythematosus.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving pantoprazole injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Your doctor may tell you to take zinc supplements during your treatment.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pantoprazole injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
vomiting
joint pain
diarrhea
dizziness
pain, redness, or swelling near the place the medication was injected
in men, difficulty achieving or maintaining an erection
Some side effects may be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately, or get emergency medical help:
blistering, peeling, or bleeding skin; sores on the lips, nose, mouth, or genitals; swollen glands; shortness of breath; fever; or flu-like symptoms
rash hives; itching; swelling of the eyes, face, lips, mouth, throat, or tongue; difficulty breathing or swallowing; or hoarseness
irregular, fast, or pounding heartbeat; muscle spasms; uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body; excessive tiredness; lightheadedness; dizziness; or seizures
severe diarrhea with watery stools, stomach pain, or fever
new or worsening joint pain; rash on cheeks or arms that is sensitive to sunlight, joint pain
abdominal pain or soreness, blood in your stool
increased or decreased urination, blood in urine, fatigue, nausea, loss of appetite, fever, rash, or joint pain
Pantoprazole may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
People who receive proton pump inhibitors such as pantoprazole may be more likely to fracture their wrists, hips, or spine than people who do not receive one of these medications. People who receive proton pump inhibitors may also develop fundic gland polyps (a type of growth on the stomach lining). These risks are highest in people who receive high doses of one of these medications or receive them for one year or longer. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving pantoprazole.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain laboratory tests before and during your treatment.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving pantoprazole.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Protonix I.V.
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page