CLN7 disease: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
CLN7 disease
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/cln7-disease/
CLN7 disease
Description
CLN7 disease is an inherited disorder that primarily affects the nervous system. The signs and symptoms of this condition typically begin between ages 2 and 7. The initial features are usually vision loss and problems with movement that might seem like clumsiness. Additional signs and symptoms of CLN7 disease include muscle twitches (myoclonus), difficulty coordinating movements (ataxia), recurrent seizures (epilepsy), and speech impairment. Mental functioning and motor skills (such as sitting and walking) decline with age. Individuals with CLN7 disease typically do not survive past their teens.
CLN7 disease is one of a group of disorders known as neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs), which may also be collectively referred to as Batten disease. All these disorders affect the nervous system and typically cause worsening problems with vision, movement, and thinking ability. The different NCLs are distinguished by their genetic cause. Each disease type is given the designation "CLN," meaning ceroid lipofuscinosis, neuronal, and then a number to indicate its subtype.
Frequency
The incidence of CLN7 disease is unknown; more than 70 cases have been described in the scientific literature. CLN7 disease was first diagnosed in the Turkish population and was thought to be limited to individuals in that group. However, CLN7 disease has now been identified in people around the world. Collectively, all forms of NCL affect an estimated 1 in 100,000 individuals worldwide.
Causes
Mutations in the
MFSD8
gene cause CLN7 disease. The
MFSD8
gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is unknown. The MFSD8 protein is embedded in the membrane of cell compartments called
lysosomes
, which digest and recycle different types of molecules. Based on the structure of the protein, MFSD8 probably transports molecules across the lysosomal membrane, but the specific molecules it moves have not been identified.
MFSD8
gene mutations likely lead to the production of a protein with altered structure or function. It is unclear how an altered MFSD8 protein leads to the severe neurological features of CLN7 disease. CLN7 disease, like other NCLs, is characterized by the accumulation of proteins and other substances in lysosomes. These accumulations occur in cells throughout the body; however, nerve cells seem to be particularly vulnerable to their effects. These accumulations can cause cell damage leading to cell death. Individuals with CLN7 disease have gradual nerve cell loss in certain parts of the brain, which likely leads to the signs and symptoms of this condition.
Learn more about the gene associated with CLN7 disease
MFSD8
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
CLN7
CLN7 disease, late infantile
MFSD8-related neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 7
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
CLN7 disease
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 7; CLN7
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Craiu D, Dragostin O, Dica A, Hoffman-Zacharska D, Gos M, Bastian AE,
Gherghiceanu M, Rolfs A, Nahavandi N, Craiu M, Iliescu C. Rett-like onset in
late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (CLN7) caused by compound
heterozygous mutation in the MFSD8 gene and review of the literature data on
clinical onset signs. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2015 Jan;19(1):78-86. doi:
10.1016/j.ejpn.2014.07.008. Epub 2014 Aug 7.
Citation on PubMed
Kollmann K, Uusi-Rauva K, Scifo E, Tyynela J, Jalanko A, Braulke T. Cell
biology and function of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis-related proteins. Biochim
Biophys Acta. 2013 Nov;1832(11):1866-81. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.01.019. Epub
2013 Feb 9.
Citation on PubMed
Kousi M, Siintola E, Dvorakova L, Vlaskova H, Turnbull J, Topcu M, Yuksel D,
Gokben S, Minassian BA, Elleder M, Mole SE, Lehesjoki AE. Mutations in CLN7/MFSD8
are a common cause of variant late-infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis.
Brain. 2009 Mar;132(Pt 3):810-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn366. Epub 2009 Feb 5.
Citation on PubMed
Sharifi A, Kousi M, Sagne C, Bellenchi GC, Morel L, Darmon M, Hulkova H, Ruivo
R, Debacker C, El Mestikawy S, Elleder M, Lehesjoki AE, Jalanko A, Gasnier B,
Kyttala A. Expression and lysosomal targeting of CLN7, a major facilitator
superfamily transporter associated with variant late-infantile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Nov 15;19(22):4497-514. doi:
10.1093/hmg/ddq381. Epub 2010 Sep 7.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Siintola E, Topcu M, Aula N, Lohi H, Minassian BA, Paterson AD, Liu XQ, Wilson
C, Lahtinen U, Anttonen AK, Lehesjoki AE. The novel neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis gene MFSD8 encodes a putative lysosomal transporter. Am J Hum
Genet. 2007 Jul;81(1):136-46. doi: 10.1086/518902. Epub 2007 May 14.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Williams RE, Mole SE. New nomenclature and classification scheme for the
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. Neurology. 2012 Jul 10;79(2):183-91. doi:
10.1212/WNL.0b013e31825f0547.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Degenerative Nerve Diseases
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL)
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page