Griseofulvin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Griseofulvin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682295.html
Griseofulvin
pronounced as (gri see oh ful' vin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Griseofulvin is used to treat skin infections such as jock itch, athlete's foot, and ringworm; and fungal infections of the scalp, fingernails, and toenails.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Griseofulvin comes as a tablet, capsule, and liquid to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day or can be taken two to four times a day. Although your symptoms may get better in a few days, you will have to take griseofulvin for a long time before the infection is completely gone. It is usually taken for 2 to 4 weeks for skin infections, 4 to 6 weeks for hair and scalp infections, 4 to 8 weeks for foot infections, 3 to 4 months for fingernail infections, and at least 6 months for toenail infections. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take griseofulvin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the liquid well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
Continue to take griseofulvin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking griseofulvin without talking to your doctor.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking griseofulvin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to griseofulvin, or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking griseofulvin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
you should know that griseofulvin may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking griseofulvin. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
the following nonprescription products may interact with griseofulvin: salicylates. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking griseofulvin. Do not start any of these medications while taking griseofulvin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease, porphyria, lupus, or a history of alcohol abuse.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking griseofulvin, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you drink alcohol.
you should plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Griseofulvin may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Griseofulvin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
upset stomach
vomiting
diarrhea or loose stools
thirst
fatigue
dizziness
faintness
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fever
sore throat
skin rash
mouth soreness or irritation
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Keep the liquid away from light. Do not freeze.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to griseofulvin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the griseofulvin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Fulvicin P/G
®
¶
Fulvicin-U/F
®
¶
Grifulvin V
®
Gris-PEG
®
Grisactin
®
¶
Ultragris
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page