Erenumab-aooe Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Erenumab-aooe Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618029.html
Erenumab-aooe Injection
pronounced as (e ren' ue mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Erenumab-aooe injection is used to help prevent migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that may cause nausea and sensitivity to sound or light). Erenumab-aooe injection is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by blocking the action of a certain natural substance in the body that causes migraine headaches.
How should this medicine be used?
Erenumab-aooe injection comes as a solution (liquid) in a prefilled syringe and a prefilled autoinjection device to be injected subcutaneously (under the skin). It is given once a month. Use erenumab-aooe injection at around the same day every month.
Use erenumab-aooe injection exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You may be able to inject the medication yourself at home or have a caregiver perform the injections. Ask your doctor to show you or the caregiver how to inject the medication.
Use each syringe or autoinjection device only once and inject all the solution in the syringe or device. Dispose of used syringes and devices in a puncture-resistant container. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
Remove the syringe or autoinjection device from the refrigerator. Place on a flat surface away from direct sunlight. Do not remove the needle cover or device cap. Allow it to warm to room temperature for 30 minutes before injecting. Do not try to warm the medication by heating it in a microwave, placing it in hot water, leaving it in sunlight, or through any other method.
Do not shake a prefilled syringe or autoinjection device that contains erenumab-aooe. Do not use if it is dropped.
Always look at erenumab-aooe before you inject it. It should be clear and colorless. Do not use the syringe or injection device if it is damaged, expired, frozen, or if the liquid is colored, cloudy, or contains flakes or solid particles.
Inject erenumab-aooe injection into thigh or stomach area. If a caregiver will be injecting the medication for you, it can be injected into your upper arm. Do not inject into an area where the skin is tender, thick, bruised, red, scaly, hard, or has scars or stretch marks.
Erenumab-aooe injection helps to prevent migraines but does not cure them. Continue to inject erenumab-aooe injection even if you feel well. Do not stop using erenumab-aooe injection without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using erenumab-aooe injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure or circulation problems in your fingers and toes such as Raynaud's disease (fingers and toes feel numb and change skin color to white or blue when exposed to cold temperatures or stress).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using erenumab-aooe injection, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you forget to inject your dose at the regular time, inject it as soon as you remember. Then continue your dosing schedule from the date of your last dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Erenumab-aooe injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
injection site pain, redness, swelling, or itching
constipation
cramps
muscle spasms
mouth sores
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash; hives; itching; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes; or difficulty swallowing or breathing
constipation with constant stomach pain or tenderness, vomiting, or stomach bloating
numb, cold, painful, or discolored fingers or toes
Erenumab-aooe injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication tightly closed in the container it came in. Store it in the refrigerator and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). If it is removed from the refrigerator, it can be stored at room temperature in the original container for up to 7 days. Dispose of erenumab-aooe injection if it has been left at room temperature more than 7 days. Do not freeze.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will monitor your blood pressure regularly during your treatment with erenumab-aooe injection.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aimovig
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page