Eletriptan: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Eletriptan
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603029.html
Eletriptan
pronounced as (el ih trip' tan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Eletriptan is used to treat the symptoms of migraine headaches (severe throbbing headaches that sometimes come with nausea and a strong reaction to sound and light). Eletriptan is in a class of medications called selective serotonin receptor agonists. It works by narrowing blood vessels in the brain, stopping pain signals from being sent, which stops the release of certain natural substances that cause pain, nausea, and other symptoms of migraine. Eletriptan does not stop migraine attacks from coming or reduce the number of headaches you have.
How should this medicine be used?
Eletriptan comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take at the first sign of a migraine headache. If your symptoms improve after you take eletriptan but return after 2 hours or longer, you may take a second tablet. However, if your symptoms do not improve after you take eletriptan, do not take a second tablet before calling your doctor. Your doctor will tell you the maximum number of tablets you may take in a 24-hour period.
Take eletriptan exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Call your doctor if your headaches do not get better or occur more frequently after taking eletriptan.
If you take eletriptan more often or for longer than the recommended period of time, your headaches may get worse or may occur more frequently. You should not take eletriptan or any other headache medication for more than 10 days per month. Call your doctor if you need to take eletriptan to treat more than 3 headaches in a 1-month period.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking eletriptan,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
do not take eletriptan if you have taken any of the following medications in the past 24 hours: other selective serotonin receptor agonists such as almotriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan, sumatriptan, or zolmitriptan; or ergot-type medications such as bromocriptine, cabergoline, dihydroergotamine, ergoloid mesylates, ergonovine, ergotamine, methylergonovine, methysergide, and pergolide. Do not take eletriptan within 72 hours of clarithromycin, itraconazole, ketoconazole, nefazodone, nelfinavir, ritonavir, and troleandomycin.
some medications should not be taken with eletriptan. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with eletriptan. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting eletriptan with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking eletriptan, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past 2 weeks: isocarboxazid, phenelzine, selegiline, and tranylcypromine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease; a heart attack; angina (chest pain); irregular heartbeats; stroke or 'mini-stroke'; or circulation problems such as varicose veins, blood clots in the legs, Raynaud's disease (problems with blood flow to the fingers, toes, ears, and nose), or ischemic bowel disease (bloody diarrhea and stomach pain caused by decreased blood flow to the intestines). Your doctor may tell you not to take eletriptan.
tell your doctor if you smoke or are overweight; if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, diabetes, high cholesterol, or kidney or liver disease; if you have gone through menopause; or if any family members have or have ever had heart disease or stroke.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you plan to be sexually active while you are taking this medication, talk to your doctor about effective methods of birth control. If you become pregnant while taking eletriptan, call your doctor.
you should know that eletriptan may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication will affect you.
talk to your doctor about your headache symptoms to make sure they are caused by migraines. Eletriptan should not be used to treat certain headaches.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit or drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Eletriptan may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
weakness, tiredness, dizziness, drowsiness
upset stomach, nausea
heartburn
headache
dry mouth
feeling warm or cold
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
tightness, pain, pressure, or heaviness in the chest, throat, neck, or jaw
slow or difficult speech
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
vomiting
sudden or severe stomach pain
bloody diarrhea
constipation
rapid, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
shortness of breath
lightheadedness
cold sweat
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
hives, rash, itching
paleness or blue color of the fingers and toes
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
Eletriptan may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the medication at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly.
You should keep a headache diary by writing down when you have headaches and when you take eletriptan.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
It is important for you to keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to a hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Relpax
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page