Cabotegravir and Rilpivirine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cabotegravir and Rilpivirine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621009.html
Cabotegravir and Rilpivirine Injection
pronounced as (ka" boe teg' ra vir) and (ril'' pi vir' een)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections are used in combination for the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection. Cabotegravir is in a class of medications called HIV integrase inhibitors. Rilpivirine is in a class of medications called non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs). These medications work by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood.
Although cabotegravir and rilpivirine do not cure HIV, they may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Receiving these medications and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of giving the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Cabotegravir and rilpivirine extended-release (long-acting) injections come as suspensions (liquids) to be injected into a muscle in your buttocks by a healthcare provider. You will receive cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections once every month or two months.
Before receiving your first cabotegravir and rilpivirine extended-release injections, you may take cabotegravir and rilpivirine tablets by mouth once daily for one month (at least 28 days) to see if you can tolerate these medications.
Rilpivirine extended-release injection may cause serious adverse reactions. A doctor or nurse will monitor you to be sure you are not having a serious reaction to the medication. Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms during or shortly after your injection: difficulty breathing, stomach cramps, sweating, mouth numbness, anxiety, flushing, lightheadedness, or dizziness.
Cabotegravir and rilpivirine extended-release injections help to control HIV, but they do not cure it. Keep all appointments to receive cabotegravir and rilpivirine extended-release injections even if you feel well. If you miss appointments to receive cabotegravir and rilpivirine extended-release injections, your condition may become more difficult to treat.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with cabotegravir and rilpivirine. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with cabotegravir and rilpivirine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting cabotegravir and rilpivirine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while receiving cabotegravir and rilpivirine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with cabotegravir and rilpivirine: St John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start receiving cabotegravir and rilpivirine. Do not start any of these medications while receiving cabotegravir and rilpivirine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had depression or other mental illness, or liver disease, including hepatitis B or C infection.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while receiving cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are receiving cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections.
you should know that cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections may cause changes in your thoughts, behavior, or mental health. Call your doctor immediately if you develop any of the following symptoms while you are receiving and rilpivirine injections: new or worsening depression; or thinking about killing yourself or planning or trying to do so. Be sure your family knows which symptoms may be serious so that they can call your doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections appointment by more than 7 days, call your doctor right away to discuss your treatment options.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain, tenderness, swelling, redness, itching, bruising, or warmth at injection site
fever
tiredness
headache
muscle, bone, or back pain
nausea
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the HOW or SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS sections, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash with or without: fever; tiredness; muscle or joint pain; swelling of the face, lips, mouth, tongue, or throat; skin blisters; difficulty breathing or swallowing; mouth sores; redness or swelling of eyes; pain on right side of the stomach; pale stools; nausea; vomiting; or dark colored urine
yellow eyes or skin; right upper abdominal pain; bruising; bleeding; loss of appetite; confusion; yellow or brown-colored urine; or pale stools
altered mood, mood swings, negative thoughts, thoughts or attempts of harming yourself
Cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving these medications.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about cabotegravir and rilpivirine injections.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cabenuva
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page