Tranexamic Acid: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tranexamic Acid
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a612021.html
Tranexamic Acid
pronounced as (tran'' ex am' ik) (as' id)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tranexamic acid is used to treat heavy bleeding during the menstrual cycle (monthly periods) in women. Tranexamic acid is in a class of medications called antifibrinolytics. It works to improve blood clotting.
How should this medicine be used?
Tranexamic acid comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food three times a day for up to 5 days during monthly menstruation. You should begin taking this medication each month when your period starts. Do not take tranexamic acid when you do not have a period. Take tranexamic acid at around the same times every day you are to receive a dose. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take tranexamic acid exactly as directed. Do not take tranexamic acid tablets for more than 5 days in a menstrual cycle or take more than 6 tablets in a 24 hour period of time.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Tranexamic acid is used to decrease the amount of blood lost during your monthly period but does not stop menstrual bleeding. Call your doctor if your bleeding does not improve or gets worse during your treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tranexamic acid,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tranexamic acid, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in tranexamic acid tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with tranexamic acid. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with tranexamic acid. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting tranexamic acid with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking tranexamic acid, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor you are taking tranexamic acid if you will be receiving medications to treat blood clots, including tissue plasminogen activators such as alteplase (Activase) and reteplase (Retavase). Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a blood clot, if you have a blood clotting condition, or if you have been told you are at risk of having a blood clot. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take tranexamic acid.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease. Also tell your doctor if the time between the start of your menstrual periods is less than 21 days or more than 35 days.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking tranexamic acid, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking tranexamic acid.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it, but then take your next dose at least 6 hours later. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take more than two tablets at a time to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tranexamic acid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
tiredness
sinus pain
back pain
stomach pain
bone, joint, or muscle pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking tranexamic acid and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
changes in vision, including color vision
chest pain
shortness of breath
leg pain, swelling, tenderness, redness, or warmth
Tranexamic acid may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
dizziness
changes in vision
changes in behavior or mood
uncontrollable shaking or twitching of a part of your body
rash
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Lysteda
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page