MDA5 deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
MDA5 deficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/mda5-deficiency/
MDA5 deficiency
Description
MDA5 deficiency is a disorder of the immune system (immunodeficiency) that leads to recurrent, severe infections of the lungs and airways (respiratory tract) beginning in infancy. These infections are most frequently caused by rhinovirus (the virus that causes the common cold). Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and the influenza (flu) virus may also cause recurrent infections in affected individuals. While infection by these viruses is common in all children, it usually causes mild symptoms and lasts only a short time before being cleared by a healthy immune system. In contrast, individuals with MDA5 deficiency frequently require hospitalization due to the severity of the symptoms caused by the infection. Repeated infections can contribute to chronic lung disease.
Infections usually become less frequent with age in people with MDA5 deficiency, as the body's immune system matures and develops other mechanisms for fighting viruses.
Frequency
MDA5 deficiency is likely a rare disorder. Its prevalence is unknown.
Causes
MDA5 deficiency is caused by mutations in the
IFIH1
gene, which provides instructions for making the MDA5 protein. These mutations lead to production of an altered MDA5 protein that cannot function, resulting in a shortage (deficiency) of MDA5 activity.
The MDA5 protein plays an important role in innate immunity, the body's early, nonspecific response to foreign invaders (pathogens) such as viruses and bacteria. In particular, the protein recognizes a molecule called double-stranded RNA (a chemical cousin of DNA), which certain viruses, including rhinovirus, RSV, and the flu virus, have as their genetic material or produce when they infect cells and copy (replicate) themselves. (Another subset of viruses has DNA as their genetic material.) When the MDA5 protein recognizes pieces of viral RNA inside the cell, it helps turn on the production of immune system proteins called interferons. Interferons stimulate the immune system to fight infections.
Deficiency of MDA5 protein activity reduces interferon production in response to RNA-containing viruses. A lack of the important early immune response stimulated by interferons leads to severe viral infections in infants with MDA5 deficiency.
Learn more about the gene associated with MDA5 deficiency
IFIH1
Inheritance
The inheritance pattern of MDA5 deficiency is unclear. In some cases, the condition seems to follow an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition. In other cases, it appears that the condition is inherited in an
autosomal dominant pattern
, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
Other Names for This Condition
IFIH1 deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Asgari S, Schlapbach LJ, Anchisi S, Hammer C, Bartha I, Junier T, Mottet-Osman
G, Posfay-Barbe KM, Longchamp D, Stocker M, Cordey S, Kaiser L, Riedel T, Kenna
T, Long D, Schibler A, Telenti A, Tapparel C, McLaren PJ, Garcin D, Fellay J.
Severe viral respiratory infections in children with IFIH1
loss-of-function mutations. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Aug
1;114(31):8342-8347. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1704259114. Epub 2017 Jul 17.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Berke IC, Yu X, Modis Y, Egelman EH. MDA5 assembles into a polar helical
filament on dsRNA. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 6;109(45):18437-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212186109. Epub 2012 Oct 22.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Lamborn IT, Jing H, Zhang Y, Drutman SB, Abbott JK, Munir S, Bade S, Murdock
HM, Santos CP, Brock LG, Masutani E, Fordjour EY, McElwee JJ, Hughes JD, Nichols
DP, Belkadi A, Oler AJ, Happel CS, Matthews HF, Abel L, Collins PL, Subbarao K,
Gelfand EW, Ciancanelli MJ, Casanova JL, Su HC. Recurrent rhinovirus infections
in a child with inherited MDA5 deficiency. J Exp Med. 2017 Jul
3;214(7):1949-1972. doi: 10.1084/jem.20161759. Epub 2017 Jun 12.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Loo YM, Gale M Jr. Immune signaling by RIG-I-like receptors. Immunity. 2011
May 27;34(5):680-92. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.003.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Zaki M, Thoenes M, Kawalia A, Nurnberg P, Kaiser R, Heller R, Bolz HJ.
Recurrent and Prolonged Infections in a Child with a Homozygous IFIH1
Nonsense Mutation. Front Genet. 2017 Sep 22;8:130. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2017.00130.
eCollection 2017.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Immune System and Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Immune response
Immunodeficiency disorders
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page