Cyclosporine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cyclosporine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a684054.html
Cyclosporine Injection
pronounced as (sye' kloe spor een)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Cyclosporine injection must be given under the supervision of a doctor who is experienced in treating transplant patients and prescribing medications that decrease the activity of the immune system.
Receiving cyclosporine injection may increase the risk that you will develop an infection or cancer, especially lymphoma (cancer of a part of the immune system) or skin cancer. This risk may be higher if you receive cyclosporine injection with other medications that decrease the activity of the immune system such as azathioprine (Imuran), cancer chemotherapy, methotrexate (Rheumatrex), sirolimus (Rapamune), and tacrolimus (Prograf). Tell your doctor if you are taking any of these medications, and if you have or have ever had any type of cancer. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: sore throat, fever, chills, and other signs of infection; flu-like symptoms; coughing; difficulty urinating; pain when urinating; a red, raised, or swollen area on the skin; new sores or discoloration on the skin; lumps or masses anywhere in your body; night sweats; swollen glands in the neck, armpits, or groin; difficulty breathing; chest pain; weakness or tiredness that does not go away; or pain, swelling, or fullness in the stomach.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving cyclosporine injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cyclosporine injection is used with other medications to prevent transplant rejection (attack of the transplanted organ by the immune system of the person receiving the organ) in people who have received kidney, liver, and heart transplants. Cyclosporine injection should only be used to treat people who are unable to take cyclosporine by mouth. Cyclosporine is in a class of medications called immunosuppressants. It works by decreasing the activity of the immune system.
How should this medicine be used?
Cyclosporine injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected over 2 to 6 hours into a vein, usually by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or medical facility. It is usually given 4 to 12 hours before transplant surgery and once a day after the surgery until medication can be taken by mouth.
A doctor or nurse will watch you closely while you are receiving cyclosporine injection so that you can be treated quickly if you have a serious allergic reaction.
Other uses for this medicine
Cyclosporine injection is also sometimes used to treat Crohn's disease (a condition in which the body attacks the lining of the digestive tract, causing pain, diarrhea, weight loss, and fever) and to prevent rejection in patients who have received pancreas or cornea transplants. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving cyclosporine injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cyclosporine (Gengraf, Neoral, Sandimmune), any other medications, or Cremophor EL.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking, or plan to take while receiving cyclosporine injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you more carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with cyclosporine: St. John's wort; nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start receiving cyclosporine injection. Do not start any of these medications while receiving cyclosporine injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you are being treated with phototherapy (a treatment for psoriasis that involves exposing the skin to ultraviolet light) and if you have or have ever had low levels of cholesterol or magnesium in your blood or high blood pressure.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while receiving cyclosporine injection, call your doctor. Cyclosporine injection may increase the risk that your baby will be born too early.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding or planning to breastfeed.
do not have vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
you should know that cyclosporine may cause extra tissue to grow in your gums. Be sure to brush your teeth carefully and see a dentist regularly during your treatment to decrease the risk that you will develop this side effect.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Avoid drinking grapefruit juice or eating grapefruit while receiving cyclosporine injection.
Your doctor may tell you to limit the amount of potassium in your diet. Follow these instructions carefully. Talk to your doctor about the amount of potassium-rich foods such as bananas, prunes, raisins, and orange juice that you may have in your diet. Many salt substitutes contain potassium, so talk to your doctor about using them during your treatment.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cyclosporine injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
increased hair growth on the face, arms, and back
swelling of gum tissue, or growth of extra tissue on the gums
acne
uncontrollable shaking of a part of your body
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hands, arms, feet, or legs
cramps
breast enlargement in men
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
flushing of the face or chest
shortness of breath
wheezing
fast heartbeat
rash
hives
itching
difficulty swallowing
loss of consciousness
seizures
changes in mood or behavior
difficulty moving
vision problems or sudden blackouts
swelling of the hands, arms, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Cyclosporine injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to cyclosporine injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sandimmune
®
Injection
Last Revised -
12/01/2009
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page