Tafasitamab-cxix Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tafasitamab-cxix Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620053.html
Tafasitamab-cxix Injection
pronounced as (ta" fa sit' a mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tafasitamab-cxix injection is used to treat certain types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (types of cancer that begin in a type of white blood cells that normally fights infection) and follicular lymphoma (FL; a type of cancer that begins in the white blood cells). Tafasitamab-cxix injection is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by helping the body to slow or stop the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Tafasitamab-cxix comes as a powder to be mixed with a liquid and given into a vein by a doctor or nurse in a healthcare setting. Your doctor will tell you how often you will receive tafasitamab-cxix injection. The schedule depends on the condition you have and on how your body responds to the medication.
Tafasitamab-cxix may cause serious reactions while you receive the medication. You may be given other medications to treat or help prevent reactions to tafasitamab-cxix. A doctor or nurse will watch you closely while you are receiving the infusion to be sure you are not having a serious reaction to the medication. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately: fever, chills, flushing, headache, or shortness of breath.
Your doctor may pause or stop your treatment if you experience certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with tafasitamab-cxix injection.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving tafasitamab-cxix injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have an infection or if you have or have ever had an infection that keeps coming back.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for at least 3 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about types of birth control that will work for you. If you become pregnant while receiving tafasitamab-cxix injection, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Do not breastfeed during your treatment with tafasitamab-cxix injection and for 3 months after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a tafasitamab-cxix injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tafasitamab-cxix injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
constipation
nausea
vomiting
decreased appetite
stomach pain
back pain
muscle spasms
rash
itching
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles, or legs
unusual tiredness or weakness
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, sore throat, chills, cough, burning or painful urination, or other signs of infection
unusual bruising or bleeding
pale skin, fatigue, or shortness of breath
Tafasitamab-cxix injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to tafasitamab-cxix injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about tafasitamab-cxix injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Monjuvi
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page