Tirzepatide injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tirzepatide injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622044.html
Tirzepatide injection
pronounced as (tir zep' a tide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Tirzepatide injection may may increase the risk that you will develop thyroid tumors, including a type of thyroid cancer. Tirzepatide injection caused thyroid tumors in rats. It is not known if this medication increases the risk of tumors in humans. Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or ever had thyroid cancer or a condition called Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia syndrome type 2 (MEN 2) syndrome (condition that causes tumors in more than one gland in the body). If so, your doctor will probably tell you not to use tirzepatide injection. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: lump or swelling in your neck, hoarseness, trouble swallowing, or shortness of breath.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain tests to check your body's response to tirzepatide.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with tirzepatide and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risk of taking tirzepatide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Tirzepatide injection is used for the following:
to control blood sugar levels in certain patients with type 2 diabetes (condition in which blood sugar is too high because the body does not make or use insulin normally)..
to treat obstructive sleep apnea (a condition where breathing is stopped for short times while sleeping) in adults with obesity.
to assist with weight loss in certain people who are obese or overweight and have weight-related medical problems
Tirzepatide is in a class of medications called incretin mimetics. It works by helping the pancreas to release the right amount of insulin when blood sugar levels are high. Insulin helps move sugar from the blood into other body tissues where it is used for energy. Tirzepatide injection also slows the emptying of the stomach and may decrease appetite and cause weight loss.
Over time, people who have diabetes and high blood sugar can develop serious or life-threatening complications, including heart disease, stroke, kidney problems, nerve damage, and eye problems. Using medication(s), making lifestyle changes (e.g., diet, exercise, quitting smoking), and regularly checking your blood sugar may help to manage your diabetes and improve your health. This therapy may also decrease your chances of having a heart attack, stroke, or other diabetes-related complications such as kidney failure, nerve damage (numb, cold legs or feet; decreased sexual ability in men and women), eye problems, including changes or loss of vision, or gum disease. Your doctor and other healthcare providers will talk to you about the best way to manage your diabetes.
How should this medicine be used?
Tirzepatide comes as a solution (liquid) in a pre-filled pen or vial to be injected subcutaneously (under the skin). It is injected once a week with or without meals at any time of day.
Use tirzepatide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of tirzepatide and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 4 weeks.
Tirzepatide controls diabetes but does not cure it. It may take 4 weeks or longer before you feel the full benefit of tirzepatide. Continue to take tirzepatide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking tirzepatide without talking to your doctor.
You will be shown how to use the injection pen or vial by your doctor or nurse. You will also be given instructions for use with the medicine. This will tell you how to inject it. Read it carefully. Ask your pharmacist or doctor if you have any questions about how to inject this medication.
Tirzepatide can be injected in the abdomen, thigh or upper arm. Rotate injection sites with each dose.
You may change the day of the week you inject tirzepatide as long as at least 3 days have passed between doses.
You may administer insulin in the same area as tirzepatide but they should not be given right next to each other. Also, you should not mix tirzepatide and insulin in the same injection.
Always look at the tirzepatide solution before you inject it. It should be clear, colorless to slightly yelow and free of particles. Do not use semaglutide if it is colored (except slightly yellow), cloudy, frozen, or contains solid particles, or if the expiration date on the pen has passed.
Never reuse needles and never share needles or pens. Always remove the needle right after you inject your dose. Dispose of needles in a puncture-resistant container. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to dispose of the puncture resistant container.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking tirzepatide,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using tirzepatide injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had pancreas or kidney disease, stomach problems such as difficulty digesting food, or history of diabetic retinopathy.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking tirzepatide.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking tirzepatide, call your doctor immediately. You should know that tirzepatide may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, and injections). Your doctor may suggest you use another type of birth control for 4 weeks after starting tirzepatide and for 4 weeks after each dose change.This medication may cause changes in your blood sugar. Signs and symptoms of low blood sugar may include dizziness or lightheadedness, irritability, sweating, hunger, drowsiness, shakiness, weakness, headache, fast heart rate and feeling jittery. You should know the symptoms of low blood sugar and what to do if you have these symptoms.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Inject the missed dose as soon as you remember it within 4 days after the missed dose. However, if more than 4 days have passed, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not inject two doses within 3 days of each other.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tirzepatide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
decreased appetite
constipation
upset stomach
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, stop taking tirzepatide and call your doctor immediately:
stomach pain that will not go away (and may radiate to the back) with or without vomiting
swelling of the face, throat, or around the mouth or eyes; hives; rash; itching; trouble swallowing or breathing; dizziness; or a rapid heartbeat
Tirzepatide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Tirzepatide should be stored in the refrigerator (between 36 to 46 degrees Fahrenheit). Keep tirzepatide in its original carton until use to protect from light. Single-dose pens or vials can be stored at room temperature for 21 days, if needed. Do not return the vials or pens to the refrigerator if previously stored at room temperature.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body’s response to tirzepatide.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mounjaro
®
Zepbound
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page