Ondansetron Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ondansetron Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a606022.html
Ondansetron Injection
pronounced as (on dan' se tron)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ondansetron injection is used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by cancer chemotherapy and surgery. Ondansetron is in a class of medications called serotonin 5-HT
3
receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of serotonin, a natural substance that may cause nausea and vomiting.
How should this medicine be used?
Ondansetron comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein) or intramuscularly (into a muscle) by a health care provider in a hospital or clinic. When ondansetron is used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy, it is usually given 30 minutes before the start of chemotherapy. Additional doses may be given 4 hours after the first dose of ondansetron and 8 hours after the first dose of ondansetron, if needed. When ondansetron is used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by surgery, it is usually given just before the surgery. Ondansetron is also sometimes given after surgery to patients who are experiencing nausea and vomiting and who did not receive ondansetron before surgery.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using ondansetron,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ondansetron, alosetron (Lotronex), dolasetron (Anzemet), granisetron (Kytril), palonosetron (Aloxi), or any other medications: or any of the ingredients in ondansetron injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are receiving apomorphine (Apokyn). Your doctor will probably tell you not to use ondansetron if you are receiving this medication.
some medications should not be taken with ondansetron injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with ondansetron injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before using ondansetron injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using ondansetron injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacis ;.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had long QT syndrome (condition that increases the risk of developing an irregular heartbeat that may cause fainting or sudden death), or another type of irregular heart beat or heart rhythm problem, or if you have or have ever had low levels of magnesium or potassium in your blood, heart failure (HF; condition in which the heart cannot pump enough blood to other parts of the body), or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving ondansetron, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your usual diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ondansetron may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
constipation
drowsiness
feeling cold or chills
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in the hand or feet
fever
injection site pain, redness, swelling, warmth, or burning
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or seek emergency medical treatment:
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, throat, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
difficulty breathing or swallowing
chest pain
shortness of breath
dizziness, light-headedness, or fainting
fast, slow or irregular heartbeat
blurred vision or vision loss
lightheadedness
agitation
hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
fever
excessive sweating
confusion
nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea
loss of coordination
stiff or twitching muscles
seizures
coma (loss of consciousness)
Ondansetron may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
This medication will be stored in the hospital or clinic.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
sudden loss of vision for a short time
dizziness or lightheadedness
fainting
constipation
irregular heart beat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zofran
®
Injection
Last Revised -
01/15/2015
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page