Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccine : MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615028.html
Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccine
Why get vaccinated?
What is HPV vaccine?
Talk with your healthcare provider
What are the risks of a vaccine reaction?
What if there is a serious problem?
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
How can I learn more?
Brand names
Other names
Why get vaccinated?
HPV (human papillomavirus) vaccine can prevent infection with some types of human papillomavirus.
HPV infections can cause certain types of cancers, including:
cervical, vaginal, and vulvar cancer in females
penile cancer in males
anal cancer in both men and women
cancers of tonsils, base of tongue, and back of throat (oropharyngeal cancer) in both men and women
HPV infections can also cause anogenital warts.
HPV vaccine can prevent over 90% of cancers caused by HPV.
HPV is spread through intimate skin-to-skin or sexual contact. HPV infections are so common that nearly all people will get at least one type of HPV at some time in their lives. Most HPV infections go away on their own within 2 years. But sometimes HPV infections will last longer and can cause cancers later in life.
What is HPV vaccine?
HPV vaccine is routinely routinely recommended for adolescents at 11 or 12 years of age to ensure they are protected before they are exposed to the virus. HPV vaccine may be given beginning at age 9 years and vaccination is recommended for everyone through 26 years of age.
HPV vaccine may be given to adults 27 through 45 years of age, based on discussions between the patient and health care provider.
Most children who get the first dose before 15 years of age need 2 doses of HPV vaccine. People who get the first dose at or after 15 years of age and younger people with certain immunocompromising conditions need 3 doses. Your health care provider can give you more information.
HPV vaccine may be given at the same time as other vaccines.
Talk with your healthcare provider
Tell your vaccination provider if the person getting the vaccine:
Has had an allergic reaction after a previous dose of HPV vaccine, or has any severe life-threatening allergies.
Is pregnant -- HPV vaccine is not recommended until after pregnancy.
In some cases, your health care provider may decide to postpone HPV vaccination until a future visit.
People with minor illnesses, such as a cold, may be vaccinated. People who are moderately or severely ill should usually wait until they recover before getting HPV vaccine.
Your health care provider can give you more information.
What are the risks of a vaccine reaction?
Soreness, redness, or swelling where the shot is given can happen after HPV vaccination.
Fever or headache can happen after HPV vaccination.
People sometimes faint after medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your doctor if you feel dizzy, or have vision changes or ringing in the ears.
As with any medication, there is a very remote chance of a vaccine causing a severe allergic reaction, other serious injury, or death.
What if there is a serious problem?
An allergic reaction could occur after the vaccinated person leaves the clinic. If you see signs of a severe allergic reaction (hives, swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, or weakness), call 9-1-1 and get the person to the nearest hospital.
For other signs that concern you, call your health care provider.
Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself. Visit the VAERS website at
http://www.vaers.hhs.gov
or call
1-800-822-7967
.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions, and VAERS staff members do not give medical advice
.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a federal program that was created to compensate people who may have been injured by certain vaccines. Claims regarding alleged injury or death due to vaccination have a time limit for filing, which may be as short as two years. Visit the VICP website at
http://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation
or call
1-800-338-2382
to learn about the program and about filing a claim.
How can I learn more?
Ask your healthcare provider.
Call your local or state health department.
Visit the website of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for vaccine package inserts and additional information at
https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/vaccines
.
Contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): call
1-800-232-4636 (1-800-CDC-INFO)
or visit CDC's website at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines
.
HPV Vaccine (Human Papillomavirus) Information Statement. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Immunization Program. 8/6/2021.
Brand names
Gardasil-9
®
Other names
HPV
Last Revised -
11/15/2021
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page