Rivastigmine Transdermal Patch: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rivastigmine Transdermal Patch
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607078.html
Rivastigmine Transdermal Patch
pronounced as (ri va stig' meen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rivastigmine transdermal patches are used to treat dementia (a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities and may cause changes in mood and personality) in people with Alzheimer's disease (a brain disease that slowly destroys the memory and the ability to think, learn, communicate and handle daily activities). Transdermal rivastigmine is also used to treat dementia in people with Parkinson's disease (a brain system disease with symptoms of slowing of movement, muscle weakness, shuffling walk, and loss of memory). Rivastigmine is in a class of medications called cholinesterase inhibitors. It improves mental function (such as memory and thinking) by increasing the amount of a certain natural substance in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Transdermal rivastigmine comes as a patch you apply to the skin. It is usually applied once a day. Apply the rivastigmine patch at around the same time each day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use the rivastigmine skin patch exactly as directed. Do not apply it more or less often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of rivastigmine and gradually increase your dose, not more often than once every 4 weeks.
Transdermal rivastigmine may improve the ability to think and remember or slow the loss of these abilities, but it does not cure Alzheimer's disease or dementia in people with Parkinson's disease. Continue to use transdermal rivastigmine even if you feel well. Do not skip using transdermal rivastigmine without talking to your doctor.
Apply the patch to clean, dry skin that is relatively free of hair (upper or lower back or upper arm or chest). Do not apply the patch to an open wound or cut, to skin that is irritated, red, or to skin that is affected by a rash or other skin problem. Do not apply the patch to a place that would be rubbed against by tight clothing. Select a different area each day to avoid skin irritation. Be sure to remove the patch before you apply another one. Do not apply a patch to the same spot for at least 14 days.
If the patch loosens or falls off, replace it with a new patch. However, you should remove the new patch at the time that you were scheduled to remove the original patch.
While you are wearing a rivastigmine patch, protect the patch from direct heat such as heating pads, electric blankets, heat lamps, saunas, hot tubs, and heated water beds. Do not expose the patch to direct sunlight for very long.
To apply the patch, follow these steps:
Choose the area where you will apply the patch. Wash the area with soap and warm water. Rinse off all of the soap and dry the area with a clean towel. Be sure the skin is free of powders, oil, and lotions.
Select a patch in a sealed pouch and cut open the pouch open with scissors. Be careful not to cut the patch.
Remove the patch from the pouch and hold it with the protective liner facing you.
Peel the liner off one side of the patch. Be careful not to touch the sticky side with your fingers. A second strip of liner should remain stuck to the patch.
Press the patch firmly onto your skin with the sticky side down.
Remove the second strip of protective liner and press the rest of the sticky side of the patch firmly against your skin. Be sure that the patch is pressed flat against the skin with no bumps or folds and the edges are firmly attached to the skin.
Wash your hands with soap and water after you handle the patch.
After you have worn the patch for 24 hours, use your fingers to peel the patch off slowly and gently. Fold the patch in half with the sticky sides together and dispose of it safely, out of reach of children and pets.
Apply a new patch to a different area immediately by following steps 1 to 8.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using transdermal rivastigmine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rivastigmine, neostigmine (Prostigmin), physostigmine (Antilirium, Isopto Eserine), pyridostigmine (Mestinon, Regonol), or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using transdermal rivastigmine. . Your doctor may change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, an enlarged prostate or other condition that blocks the flow of urine, ulcers, abnormal heart beats, seizures, uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body, other heart or lung disease, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using transdermal rivastigmine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using transdermal rivastigmine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed patch as soon as you remember it. However, you should still remove the patch at your regular patch removal time. If it is almost time for the next patch, skip the missed patch and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra patches to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Transdermal rivastigmine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
loss of appetite
stomach pain
weight loss
depression
headache
anxiety
dizziness
weakness
excessive tiredness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep.
tremor or worsening tremor
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
black and tarry stools
red blood in stools
bloody vomit
vomiting material that looks like coffee grounds
difficulty urinating
painful urination
seizures
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of any patches that are outdated or no longer needed by opening each pouch, folding each patch in half with the sticky sides together. Place the folded patch in the original pouch and dispose of it safely, out of the reach of children and pets.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone applies extra or a higher dosage of rivastigmine patches but does not have any of the symptoms listed below, remove the patch or patches. Call your doctor and do not apply any additional patches for the next 24 hours.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
increased saliva
sweating
slow heartbeat
dizziness
muscle weakness
difficulty breathing
fainting
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Exelon
®
Patch
Last Revised -
09/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page