Naltrexone and Bupropion: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Naltrexone and Bupropion
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a619020.html
Naltrexone and Bupropion
pronounced as (nal trex' one) (byoo proe' pee on)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
This medication contains bupropion, the same active ingredient as some antidepressant medications (Wellbutrin, Aplenzin) and a medication used to help people stop smoking (Zyban). A small number of children, teenagers, and young adults (up to 24 years of age) who took antidepressants ('mood elevators') such as bupropion during clinical studies became suicidal (thinking about harming or killing oneself or planning or trying to do so). Children, teenagers, and young adults who take antidepressants to treat depression or other mental illnesses may be more likely to become suicidal than children, teenagers, and young adults who do not take antidepressants to treat these conditions. The combination of naltrexone and bupropion is not approved for use in children under 18 years of age.
You should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways when you take the combination of naltrexone and bupropion even if you are an adult over 24 years of age. You may become suicidal, especially at the beginning of your treatment and any time that your dose is increased or decreased. You, your family, or your caregiver should call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: new or worsening depression; thinking about harming or killing yourself, or planning or trying to do so; extreme worry; agitation; anxiety or panic attacks; difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep; aggressive, angry, or violent behavior; irritability; acting without thinking; severe restlessness; abnormal thoughts or sensations; feeling that people are against you; hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist); feeling confused; frenzied abnormal excitement; or any other sudden or unusual changes in behavior. Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
Your healthcare provider will want to see you often while you are taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion, especially at the beginning of your treatment. Be sure to keep all appointments for office visits with your doctor.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with the combination of naltrexone and bupropion and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion.
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of naltrexone and bupropion is used along with a reduced calorie diet and exercise plan to help adults who are obese, or who are overweight and have weight-related medical problems, to lose weight and then to keep from gaining back that weight. Naltrexone is in a class of medications called opiate antagonists. Bupropion is in a class of medications called antidepressants. These medications work together on two areas of the brain, the hunger center and the reward system, to reduce appetite and help control cravings.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of naltrexone and bupropion comes as an extended-release (long-acting) tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day. Do not take this medication with a high-fat meal. Take naltrexone and bupropion at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take naltrexone and bupropion exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the extended-release tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of the combination of naltrexone and bupropion and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every week, for 4 weeks. After 16 weeks of treatment, your doctor will check to see how much weight you have lost. If you have not lost a certain amount of weight, your doctor may tell you to stop taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion as it is unlikely that you will benefit from continuing your treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to naltrexone, bupropion, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in naltrexone and bupropion tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: a monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor such as isocarboxazid (Marplan), linezolid (Zyvox), methylene blue, phenelzine (Nardil), rasagiline (Azilect), selegiline (Emsam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate) Your doctor will probably tell you not to take the combination of naltrexone and bupropion. If you stop taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion, your doctor will tell you that you should wait at least 14 days before you start to take an MAO inhibitor.
tell your doctor if you are taking any opioid medications or street drugs including heroin, prescription pain medications, tramadol (Ultram, Ultracet), opioid dependence treatments such as buprenorphine (Buprenex, Butrans, Sublocade) or methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), and certain medications for diarrhea, cough, or cold. Also tell your doctor if you have taken any of these medications in at least the past 7 to 10 days. Ask your doctor if you are not sure if a medication you have taken is an opioid. Your doctor will tell you not to take the combination of naltrexone and bupropion if you have taken or used opioids in at least the past 7 to 10 days.
do not take any opioid medications or use opioid street drugs during your treatment with the combination of naltrexone and bupropion. Naltrexone blocks the effects of opioid medications and opioid street drugs. You may not feel the effects of these substances if you take or use them at low or normal doses. If you take or use higher doses of opioid medications or drugs during your treatment with the combination of naltrexone and bupropion, it may cause serious injury, coma, or death.
you should know that if you took opioid medications before your treatment with the combination of naltrexone and bupropion, you may be more sensitive to the effects of opioid medications when your next dose of the combination of naltrexone and bupropion is due, if you miss a dose of the combination of naltrexone and bupropion, after you finish your treatment, or if you undergo detoxification. If you use opioids in amounts that you used before your treatment with the combination of naltrexone and bupropion, it can lead to overdose and death. After you finish your treatment, tell any doctor who may prescribe medications for you that you were previously treated with the combination of naltrexone and bupropion. It is important that you tell your family or caregiver about this increased sensitivity to opioids and the risk of overdose. You or your caregiver should get emergency medical help right away if you develop any of the following symptoms: trouble breathing, slow shallow breathing, drowsiness, feeling faint, dizziness, or confusion.
do not take more than one product containing bupropion at a time, including antidepressants or smoking cessation products. You could receive too much bupropion and experience severe side effects.
some medications should not be taken with naltrexone and bupropion. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with naltrexone and bupropion. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting naltrexone and bupropion with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking naltrexone and bupropion, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had seizures, anorexia nervosa (an eating disorder), or bulimia (an eating disorder), and if you have high blood pressure that cannot be controlled. Also tell your doctor if you drink large amounts of alcohol but expect to suddenly stop drinking, you take sedatives, hypnotics, benzodiazepines, or anti-seizure medicines but expect to suddenly stop taking them, or if you are in opioid withdrawal. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take the combination of naltrexone and bupropion.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has thought about or attempted suicide or has or have ever had bipolar disorder (mood that changes from depressed to abnormally excited), mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood), depression, schizophrenia (a mental illness that causes disturbed or unusual thinking, loss of interest in life, and strong or inappropriate emotions), or other mental illnesses; if you are older than 65 years of age; if you smoke or if you expect to stop smoking; and if you have or have ever had a head injury, heart attack, stroke, tumor or infection of the brain or spine, diabetes, low blood sugar, low levels of sodium in the blood, or heart, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion, call your doctor immediately.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion. Alcohol can make the side effects from naltrexone and bupropion worse.
you should know that the combination of naltrexone and bupropion may cause high blood pressure and a faster heart rate. Your doctor may check your blood pressure and heart rate before starting treatment and regularly while you are taking this medication.
you should know that the combination of naltrexone and bupropion may cause angle-closure glaucoma (condition where the fluid is suddenly blocked and unable to flow out of the eye causing a quick, severe increase in eye pressure which may lead to a loss of vision). Talk to your doctor about having an eye examination before you start taking this medication to see if you are at risk for this condition. If you have eye pain, changes in vision, or swelling or redness in or around the eye, call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment right away.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
The combination of naltrexone and bupropion may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
dry mouth
changes in your sense of taste
headache
dizziness
tiredness
flushing
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
excessive sweating
ringing in the ears
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING and SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS sections, stop taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
seizures
rash or blisters
itching
hives
swollen glands
painful sores in your mouth or around your eyes
shortness of breath
swelling of the lips or tongue
chest pain
fever
stomach pain
dark urine
yellowing of the skin or eyes
muscle or joint pain
The combination of naltrexone and bupropion may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom)
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
seizure
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist
loss of consciousness
rapid or pounding heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking the combination of naltrexone and bupropion.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Contrave
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page