Trimethadione: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Trimethadione
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601127.html
Trimethadione
pronounced as (trye meth a dye' one)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Trimethadione is used to control absence seizures (petit mal; a type of seizure in which there is a very short loss of awareness during which the person may stare straight ahead or blink his eyes and does not respond to others) when other medications will not work. Trimethadione is in a class of medications called anticonvulsants. It works by reducing abnormal electrical activity in the brain.
How should this medicine be used?
Trimethadione comes as a chewable tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken three or four times a day. Take trimethadione at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take trimethadione exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The chewable tablets may be chewed or swallowed whole.
Trimethadione may help to control your condition but will not cure it. Continue to take trimethadione even if you feel well. Do not stop taking trimethadione without talking to your doctor. Your doctor probably will decrease your dose gradually. If you suddenly stop taking trimethadione, your seizures may become worse.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with trimethadione and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking trimethadione,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to trimethadione, any other medications, or any of the ingredients of trimethadione tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking trimethadione. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had , a blood disorder, depression, mood problems, suicidal (thinking about harming or killing yourself or planning or trying to do so) thoughts or behavior, or eye, kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. Women who can become pregnant generally should not take trimethadione. However, you and your doctor may decide that trimethadione is needed to treat your condition. In that case you must: talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. If you become pregnant while using this medication, call your doctor. Trimethadione may harm the fetus.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking trimethadione.
you should know that this drug may make you dizzy or drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
avoid use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking trimethadione. Alcohol may make the side effects from trimethadione worse.
you should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways and you may become suicidal while you are taking trimethadione. A small number of adults and children 5 years of age and older (about 1 in 500 people) who took anticonvulsants such as trimethadione to treat various conditions during clinical studies became suicidal during their treatment. Some of these people developed suicidal thoughts and behavior as early as one week after they started taking the medication. There is a risk that you may experience changes in your mental health if you take an anticonvulsant medication such as trimethadione, but there may also be a risk that you will experience changes in your mental health if your condition is not treated. You and your doctor will decide whether the risks of taking an anticonvulsant medication are greater than the risks of not taking the medication. You, your family, or your caregiver should call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: panic attacks; agitation or restlessness; new or worsening irritability, anxiety, or depression; acting on dangerous impulses; difficulty falling or staying asleep; aggressive, angry, or violent behavior; mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood); talking or thinking about wanting to hurt yourself or to end your life; withdrawing from friends and family; preoccupation with death and dying; giving away prized possessions; or any other unusual changes in behavior or mood. Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if you remember a missed dose at the time you are scheduled to take the next dose, skip the missed dose completely. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Trimethadione may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
changes in weight
hiccups
headache
numbness, burning, or tingling in the hands, arms, feet, or legs
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms , call your doctor immediately:
difficulty coordinating movements
sensitivity to the sun
joint or muscle pain
chest pain or shortness of breath
swelling of your feet, ankles, or legs
weakness of your arms or legs
difficulty swallowing
speech problems
rash on the cheeks or other parts of the body
hives
sores in the mouth
easy bruising
red- or purple-colored skin spots
bloody nose
bleeding gums
unusual bleeding
extreme weakness or tiredness
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark urine
nausea or vomiting
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
fever
swollen glands
sore throat
decreased urination
droopy eyelids
blurred vision
problems seeing in bright light
seizures
Trimethadione may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store trimethadione chewable tablets in the refrigerator.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
drowsiness
nausea
dizziness
difficulty coordinating movements
changes in vision
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to trimethadione.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tridione
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page