Dalfampridine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dalfampridine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611005.html
Dalfampridine
pronounced as (dal fam' pri deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dalfampridine is used to improve walking in people who have multiple sclerosis (MS; a disease in which the nerves do not function properly and may cause weakness, numbness, loss of muscle coordination, and problems with vision, speech, and bladder control). Dalfampridine may be used alone or with other medications that control the symptoms of MS. Dalfampridine is in a class of medications called potassium channel blockers. It works by strengthening the signals sent by the brain through nerves that have been damaged by MS.
How should this medicine be used?
Dalfampridine comes as an extended-release tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food twice a day. Space your doses so that you take one dose approximately every 12 hours, and take dalfampridine at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take dalfampridine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, dissolve, or crush them.
Dalfampridine is not available in pharmacies. You can only get dalfampridine through the mail from a specialty pharmacy. Ask your doctor if you have any questions about receiving your medication.
Dalfampridine may help improve your walking only as long as you continue to take it. It may take 6 weeks or longer before you feel the full benefit of dalfampridine. Continue to take dalfampridine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking dalfampridine without talking to your doctor.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with dalfampridine and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking dalfampridine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dalfampridine, 4-aminopyridine (4-AP, fampridine) that has been prepared by your pharmacist, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in dalfampridine tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any other form of 4-aminopyridine (4-AP, fampridine) that has been prepared by your pharmacist. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have ever had a seizure and if you have kidney disease. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take dalfampridine.
tell your doctor if you have ever had an abnormal electroencephalogram (EEG, a test that measures electrical activity in the brain).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking dalfampridine, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take more than two doses of dalfampridine in a 24-hour period and do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dalfampridine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
dizziness
headache
nausea
heartburn
constipation
weakness
back pain
difficulty with balance
worsening of multiple sclerosis symptoms
burning, tingling, or itching of the skin
pain or irritation in the nose or throat
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment immediately:
seizures
painful, difficult, or frequent urination
fever or chills
pain in the back, side, or stomach
Dalfampridine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
confusion
seizures
uncontrollable shaking of a part of your body
sweating
memory loss
speech problems
weakness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to dalfampridine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ampyra
®
Other names
4-aminopyridine
4-AP
fampridine
Last Revised -
11/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page