Hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma with tendon contractures, myopathy, and pulmonary fibrosis: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma with tendon contractures, myopathy, and pulmonary fibrosis
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hereditary-fibrosing-poikiloderma-with-tendon-contractures-myopathy-and-pulmonary-fibrosis/
Hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma with tendon contractures, myopathy, and pulmonary fibrosis
Description
Hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma with tendon contractures, myopathy, and pulmonary fibrosis (abbreviated POIKTMP), is a disorder that affects many parts of the body, particularly the skin, muscles, lungs, and pancreas. Signs and symptoms vary among affected individuals.
People with POIKTMP have patchy changes in skin coloring and small clusters of blood vessels just under the skin (telangiectases), a combination known as poikiloderma. These skin changes begin in infancy and occur primarily on the face. They can also have red, scaly skin patches and mild swelling (
lymphedema
) of the arms and legs; thickened skin on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet (palmoplantar keratoderma); and abnormal hardening (sclerosis) of tissues in the fingers and toes. People with this disorder usually have
sparse scalp hair
, and their eyelashes and eyebrows can also be sparse or absent. Affected individuals have a decreased ability to sweat (hypohidrosis), which impairs their ability to tolerate heat.
Reduced movement of joints (contractures) caused by shortening of the connective tissues that attach muscles to bone (tendons) usually develops during childhood in people with POIKTMP. These contractures often affect the calf, resulting in turning in (valgus deformity) of the feet. Contractures can also affect the elbows and wrists. In addition, people with POIKTMP usually develop muscle weakness (myopathy) in the arms and legs, and medical imaging shows abnormal fatty tissue in the muscles.
Adults with POIKTMP can develop a condition called pulmonary fibrosis, in which scar tissue forms in the
lungs
. Pulmonary fibrosis eventually causes difficulty breathing and can be life-threatening within a few years after symptoms begin.
In addition to the skin, muscle, and lung problems that give this condition its name, people with POIKTMP can also have a shortage (deficiency) of enzymes produced by the
pancreas
to aid in the digestion of fats. This deficiency can lead to diarrhea and poor absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins.
Liver
problems, short stature, and delayed puberty can also occur in affected individuals. Intellectual development is not affected by this disorder.
Frequency
The prevalence of POIKTMP is unknown. At least 25 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature. POIKTMP is thought to be underdiagnosed because affected individuals may have only one or a few features of the disorder, and health care providers may not recognize these features as part of POIKTMP.
Causes
POIKTMP is caused by mutations in the
FAM111B
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is not well understood. The FAM111B protein, which is found in many parts of the body, contains a functional region called a peptidase domain. Similar proteins containing such a domain are able to break down other proteins. However, the types of proteins the FAM111B protein interacts with and the roles it plays in the body are unknown.
The
FAM111B
gene mutations that cause POIKTMP result in production of an abnormal FAM111B protein from one copy of the gene in each cell. Because most of the
FAM111B
mutations identified in people with POIKTMP result in changes in the peptidase domain, researchers think that the mutations alter the protein's function, and that these changes in FAM111B function underlie the varied signs and symptoms of POIKTMP.
Learn more about the gene associated with Hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma with tendon contractures, myopathy, and pulmonary fibrosis
FAM111B
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
In about half of cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from
one affected parent
. Other cases result from
new mutations
in the gene and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
Hereditary sclerosing poikiloderma with tendon and pulmonary involvement
HFP
POIKTMP
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Hereditary sclerosing poikiloderma with tendon and pulmonary involvement
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma-tendon contractures-myopathy-pulmonary fibrosis syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
POIKILODERMA, HEREDITARY FIBROSING, WITH TENDON CONTRACTURES, MYOPATHY, AND PULMONARY FIBROSIS; POIKTMP
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Khumalo NP, Pillay K, Beighton P, Wainwright H, Walker B, Saxe N, Mayosi BM,
Bateman ED. Poikiloderma, tendon contracture and pulmonary fibrosis: a new
autosomal dominant syndrome? Br J Dermatol. 2006 Nov;155(5):1057-61. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2133.2006.07473.x.
Citation on PubMed
Kury S, Mercier S, Shaboodien G, Besnard T, Barbarot S, Khumalo NP, Mayosi BM,
Bezieau S. CUGC for hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma with tendon contractures,
myopathy, and pulmonary fibrosis (POIKTMP). Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 May;24(5). doi:
10.1038/ejhg.2015.205. Epub 2015 Oct 7. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Mercier S, Kury S, Salort-Campana E, Magot A, Agbim U, Besnard T, Bodak N,
Bou-Hanna C, Breheret F, Brunelle P, Caillon F, Chabrol B, Cormier-Daire V, David
A, Eymard B, Faivre L, Figarella-Branger D, Fleurence E, Ganapathi M, Gherardi R,
Goldenberg A, Hamel A, Igual J, Irvine AD, Israel-Biet D, Kannengiesser C,
Laboisse C, Le Caignec C, Mahe JY, Mallet S, MacGowan S, McAleer MA, McLean I,
Meni C, Munnich A, Mussini JM, Nagy PL, Odel J, O'Regan GM, Pereon Y, Perrier J,
Piard J, Puzenat E, Sampson JB, Smith F, Soufir N, Tanji K, Thauvin C, Ulane C,
Watson RM, Khumalo NP, Mayosi BM, Barbarot S, Bezieau S. Expanding the clinical
spectrum of hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma with tendon contractures, myopathy
and pulmonary fibrosis due to FAM111B mutations. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Oct
15;10:135. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0352-4.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Mercier S, Kury S, Shaboodien G, Houniet DT, Khumalo NP, Bou-Hanna C, Bodak N,
Cormier-Daire V, David A, Faivre L, Figarella-Branger D, Gherardi RK, Glen E,
Hamel A, Laboisse C, Le Caignec C, Lindenbaum P, Magot A, Munnich A, Mussini JM,
Pillay K, Rahman T, Redon R, Salort-Campana E, Santibanez-Koref M, Thauvin C,
Barbarot S, Keavney B, Bezieau S, Mayosi BM. Mutations in FAM111B cause
hereditary fibrosing poikiloderma with tendon contracture, myopathy, and
pulmonary fibrosis. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 Dec 5;93(6):1100-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.10.013. Epub 2013 Nov 21.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Otsu U, Moriwaki S, Iki M, Nozaki K, Horiguchi Y, Kiyokane K. Early
blistering, poikiloderma, hypohidrosis, alopecia and exocrine pancreatic
hypofunction: a peculiar variant of Rothmund-Thomson syndrome? Eur J Dermatol.
2008 Nov-Dec;18(6):632-4. doi: 10.1684/ejd.2008.0509. Epub 2008 Oct 27.
Citation on PubMed
Seo A, Walsh T, Lee MK, Ho PA, Hsu EK, Sidbury R, King MC, Shimamura A.
FAM111B Mutation Is Associated With Inherited Exocrine Pancreatic Dysfunction.
Pancreas. 2016 Jul;45(6):858-62. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0000000000000529.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Takeichi T, Nanda A, Yang HS, Hsu CK, Lee JY, Al-Ajmi H, Akiyama M, Simpson
MA, McGrath JA. Syndromic inherited poikiloderma due to a de novo mutation in
FAM111B. Br J Dermatol. 2017 Feb;176(2):534-536. doi: 10.1111/bjd.14845. Epub
2016 Dec 22. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Muscle Disorders
Pulmonary Fibrosis
Skin Conditions
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Contracture deformity
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page