Gout: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Gout
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/gout/
Gout
Description
Gout is a type of arthritis, which is a group of related disorders caused by episodes of abnormal inflammation in the joints. People with gout have high levels of a substance called urate in the blood (hyperuricemia). Gout develops when hyperuricemia leads to the formation of urate crystals in joints, triggering an
inflammatory response
from the immune system.
In people with gout, the first episode of inflammation (called a flare) usually affects the big toe or other joints in the foot or ankle. If urate levels remain high, flares can recur, affecting additional joints throughout the body. The time between flares varies among affected individuals; however, most people who experience multiple flares have their second one within a year of their first.
Flares usually begin at night and can last several days. It is unclear what causes a flare to stop; the body likely turns off the inflammation response after a certain period of time. During a flare, individuals can experience throbbing or burning pain, swelling, warmth, redness, and difficulty moving the affected joint. Fevers may occur, after which the skin over the affected joint can begin to peel. Without treatment, people with gout can experience frequent flares and joint pain and damage, which can limit mobility and decrease quality of life.
In about 15 percent of people with gout, urate accumulates in the
kidneys
and forms
kidney stones
. As the condition worsens, urate crystals can also be deposited under the skin or in other soft tissue, forming a nodule called a tophus (plural: tophi). These tophi often form in the hands, elbows, or feet. Tophi do not typically cause pain, but they can become inflamed, infected, or ooze fluid. Depending on their location, tophi can interfere with movements such as walking or gripping objects.
Many people with gout also have other health conditions. Most affected individuals have high blood pressure (
hypertension
), chronic kidney disease, or obesity. Some also have diabetes, heart disease, or a history of stroke. It is unclear whether gout is the cause of a person's increased risk for these conditions, or whether the conditions cause the development of gout, or whether both of these situations occur to influence disease.
Frequency
Gout is a common condition, but it occurs more frequently in some populations than others. For example, gout occurs in 1 percent of people with Asian ancestry, 3 to 4 percent of people with European ancestry, and 6 to 8 percent of Indigenous (native) Taiwanese peoples and Māori from New Zealand.
Causes
Gout is caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Some of the factors that contribute to this condition have been confirmed by research, while others are unknown. The main risk factor for developing gout is hyperuricemia. About one-quarter of individuals with hyperuricemia go on to develop gout. It is unclear why others with hyperuricemia do not get gout.
Large studies have identified dozens of genes that play a role in the development of gout. Multiple genetic changes, each with a small effect, likely combine to increase the risk of developing this disorder. Most of the known genes play a role in transporting urate, which is a byproduct of normal biochemical processes. Many gout-associated genes play a role in releasing urate into the urine if levels are too high or reabsorbing it back into the bloodstream if more is needed in the body. Other associated genes are involved in transporting or breaking down sugars or transporting other small molecules. The roles of some associated genes are unclear. Of all the genes that have been studied, two genes,
SLC2A9
and
ABCG2
, seem to have the greatest influence on urate levels.
The
SLC2A9
gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found primarily in the kidneys where it plays a role in managing the body's levels of urate. This protein helps
reabsorb
urate into the bloodstream or release it into the urine. Genetic changes in the
SLC2A9
gene that can result in hyperuricemia increase the reabsorption of urate into the bloodstream and decrease its release into the urine.
The
ABCG2
gene provides instructions for making a protein that helps release urate into the gut so that it can be removed from the body. Genetic changes in the
ABCG2
gene that can result in hyperuricemia reduce the protein's ability to release urate into the gut.
Nongenetic factors are also believed to play a role in gout, primarily by triggering flares. These factors also often increase urate levels in the body. Consuming foods and beverages that are high in molecules called purines, such as red meat, seafood, dried beans, alcohol, and sugar-sweetened beverages can lead to increased urate. When purines are broken down, urate is made, which can cause hyperuricemia and lead to gout in some individuals. The risk for gout also increases with age. In particular, women have an increased risk after menopause. Following menopause, production of the hormone estrogen, which plays a role in removing urate from the body, declines so older women have a rise in urate levels and an increased risk of developing gout.
Learn more about the genes associated with Gout
ABCG2
SLC2A9
Inheritance
The inheritance pattern of gout is unclear because many genetic and environmental factors appear to be involved. However, having a close relative with gout likely increases a person's risk of developing the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Arthritis, gouty
Articular gout
Gouty arthritis
Gouty arthropathy
Additional Information & Resources
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
URIC ACID CONCENTRATION, SERUM, QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 1; UAQTL1
HYPOURICEMIA, RENAL, 2; RHUC2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Dalbeth N, Merriman TR, Stamp LK. Gout. Lancet. 2016 Oct
22;388(10055):2039-2052. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00346-9. Epub 2016 Apr 21.
Citation on PubMed
Dalbeth N, Stamp LK, Merriman TR. The genetics of gout: towards personalised
medicine? BMC Med. 2017 May 31;15(1):108. doi: 10.1186/s12916-017-0878-5.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Ichida K, Matsuo H, Takada T, Nakayama A, Murakami K, Shimizu T, Yamanashi Y,
Kasuga H, Nakashima H, Nakamura T, Takada Y, Kawamura Y, Inoue H, Okada C, Utsumi
Y, Ikebuchi Y, Ito K, Nakamura M, Shinohara Y, Hosoyamada M, Sakurai Y, Shinomiya
N, Hosoya T, Suzuki H. Decreased extra-renal urate excretion is a common cause of
hyperuricemia. Nat Commun. 2012 Apr 3;3:764. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1756.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Khanna D, Fitzgerald JD, Khanna PP, Bae S, Singh MK, Neogi T, Pillinger MH,
Merill J, Lee S, Prakash S, Kaldas M, Gogia M, Perez-Ruiz F, Taylor W, Liote F,
Choi H, Singh JA, Dalbeth N, Kaplan S, Niyyar V, Jones D, Yarows SA, Roessler B,
Kerr G, King C, Levy G, Furst DE, Edwards NL, Mandell B, Schumacher HR, Robbins
M, Wenger N, Terkeltaub R; American College of Rheumatology. 2012 American
College of Rheumatology guidelines for management of gout. Part 1: systematic
nonpharmacologic and pharmacologic therapeutic approaches to hyperuricemia.
Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2012 Oct;64(10):1431-46. doi: 10.1002/acr.21772. No
abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Khanna D, Khanna PP, Fitzgerald JD, Singh MK, Bae S, Neogi T, Pillinger MH,
Merill J, Lee S, Prakash S, Kaldas M, Gogia M, Perez-Ruiz F, Taylor W, Liote F,
Choi H, Singh JA, Dalbeth N, Kaplan S, Niyyar V, Jones D, Yarows SA, Roessler B,
Kerr G, King C, Levy G, Furst DE, Edwards NL, Mandell B, Schumacher HR, Robbins
M, Wenger N, Terkeltaub R; American College of Rheumatology. 2012 American
College of Rheumatology guidelines for management of gout. Part 2: therapy and
antiinflammatory prophylaxis of acute gouty arthritis. Arthritis Care Res
(Hoboken). 2012 Oct;64(10):1447-61. doi: 10.1002/acr.21773. No abstract
available.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Kottgen A, Albrecht E, Teumer A, Vitart V, Krumsiek J, Hundertmark C, Pistis
G, Ruggiero D, O'Seaghdha CM, Haller T, Yang Q, Tanaka T, Johnson AD, Kutalik Z,
Smith AV, Shi J, Struchalin M, Middelberg RP, Brown MJ, Gaffo AL, Pirastu N, Li
G, Hayward C, Zemunik T, Huffman J, Yengo L, Zhao JH, Demirkan A, Feitosa MF, Liu
X, Malerba G, Lopez LM, van der Harst P, Li X, Kleber ME, Hicks AA, Nolte IM,
Johansson A, Murgia F, Wild SH, Bakker SJ, Peden JF, Dehghan A, Steri M, Tenesa
A, Lagou V, Salo P, Mangino M, Rose LM, Lehtimaki T, Woodward OM, Okada Y, Tin A,
Muller C, Oldmeadow C, Putku M, Czamara D, Kraft P, Frogheri L, Thun GA,
Grotevendt A, Gislason GK, Harris TB, Launer LJ, McArdle P, Shuldiner AR,
Boerwinkle E, Coresh J, Schmidt H, Schallert M, Martin NG, Montgomery GW, Kubo M,
Nakamura Y, Tanaka T, Munroe PB, Samani NJ, Jacobs DR Jr, Liu K, D'Adamo P, Ulivi
S, Rotter JI, Psaty BM, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Campbell S, Devuyst O, Navarro
P, Kolcic I, Hastie N, Balkau B, Froguel P, Esko T, Salumets A, Khaw KT,
Langenberg C, Wareham NJ, Isaacs A, Kraja A, Zhang Q, Wild PS, Scott RJ, Holliday
EG, Org E, Viigimaa M, Bandinelli S, Metter JE, Lupo A, Trabetti E, Sorice R,
Doring A, Lattka E, Strauch K, Theis F, Waldenberger M, Wichmann HE, Davies G,
Gow AJ, Bruinenberg M; LifeLines Cohort Study; Stolk RP, Kooner JS, Zhang W,
Winkelmann BR, Boehm BO, Lucae S, Penninx BW, Smit JH, Curhan G, Mudgal P, Plenge
RM, Portas L, Persico I, Kirin M, Wilson JF, Mateo Leach I, van Gilst WH, Goel A,
Ongen H, Hofman A, Rivadeneira F, Uitterlinden AG, Imboden M, von Eckardstein A,
Cucca F, Nagaraja R, Piras MG, Nauck M, Schurmann C, Budde K, Ernst F, Farrington
SM, Theodoratou E, Prokopenko I, Stumvoll M, Jula A, Perola M, Salomaa V, Shin
SY, Spector TD, Sala C, Ridker PM, Kahonen M, Viikari J, Hengstenberg C, Nelson
CP; CARDIoGRAM Consortium; DIAGRAM Consortium; ICBP Consortium; MAGIC Consortium;
Meschia JF, Nalls MA, Sharma P, Singleton AB, Kamatani N, Zeller T, Burnier M,
Attia J, Laan M, Klopp N, Hillege HL, Kloiber S, Choi H, Pirastu M, Tore S,
Probst-Hensch NM, Volzke H, Gudnason V, Parsa A, Schmidt R, Whitfield JB, Fornage
M, Gasparini P, Siscovick DS, Polasek O, Campbell H, Rudan I, Bouatia-Naji N,
Metspalu A, Loos RJ, van Duijn CM, Borecki IB, Ferrucci L, Gambaro G, Deary IJ,
Wolffenbuttel BH, Chambers JC, Marz W, Pramstaller PP, Snieder H, Gyllensten U,
Wright AF, Navis G, Watkins H, Witteman JC, Sanna S, Schipf S, Dunlop MG, Tonjes
A, Ripatti S, Soranzo N, Toniolo D, Chasman DI, Raitakari O, Kao WH, Ciullo M,
Fox CS, Caulfield M, Bochud M, Gieger C. Genome-wide association analyses
identify 18 new loci associated with serum urate concentrations. Nat Genet. 2013
Feb;45(2):145-54. doi: 10.1038/ng.2500. Epub 2012 Dec 23.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Merriman T. Genomic Influences on Hyperuricemia and Gout. Rheum Dis Clin North
Am. 2017 Aug;43(3):389-399. doi: 10.1016/j.rdc.2017.04.004.
Citation on PubMed
Newberry SJ, FitzGerald JD, Motala A, Booth M, Maglione MA, Han D, Tariq A,
O'Hanlon CE, Shanman R, Dudley W, Shekelle PG. Diagnosis of Gout: A Systematic
Review in Support of an American College of Physicians Clinical Practice
Guideline. Ann Intern Med. 2017 Jan 3;166(1):27-36. doi: 10.7326/M16-0462. Epub
2016 Nov 1.
Citation on PubMed
Richette P, Doherty M, Pascual E, Barskova V, Becce F, Castaneda-Sanabria J,
Coyfish M, Guillo S, Jansen TL, Janssens H, Liote F, Mallen C, Nuki G, Perez-Ruiz
F, Pimentao J, Punzi L, Pywell T, So A, Tausche AK, Uhlig T, Zavada J, Zhang W,
Tubach F, Bardin T. 2016 updated EULAR evidence-based recommendations for the
management of gout. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Jan;76(1):29-42. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209707. Epub 2016 Jul 25.
Citation on PubMed
Shekelle PG, Newberry SJ, FitzGerald JD, Motala A, O'Hanlon CE, Tariq A,
Okunogbe A, Han D, Shanman R. Management of Gout: A Systematic Review in Support
of an American College of Physicians Clinical Practice Guideline. Ann Intern Med.
2017 Jan 3;166(1):37-51. doi: 10.7326/M16-0461. Epub 2016 Nov 1.
Citation on PubMed
Wei WH, Guo Y, Kindt AS, Merriman TR, Semple CA, Wang K, Haley CS. Abundant
local interactions in the 4p16.1 region suggest functional mechanisms underlying
SLC2A9 associations with human serum uric acid. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Oct
1;23(19):5061-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu227. Epub 2014 May 12.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Gout
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Gout
Uric acid - blood
Uric acid urine test
Related Medical Tests
Uric Acid Test
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page