Cholestyramine Resin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cholestyramine Resin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682672.html
Cholestyramine Resin
pronounced as (koe less' tir a meen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cholestyramine is used with diet changes (restriction of cholesterol and fat intake) to reduce the amount of cholesterol and certain fatty substances in your blood. Accumulation of cholesterol and fats along the walls of your arteries (a process known as atherosclerosis) decreases blood flow and, therefore, the oxygen supply to your heart, brain, and other parts of your body. Lowering your blood level of cholesterol and fats may help to prevent heart disease, angina (chest pain), strokes, and heart attacks.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Cholestyramine comes in a chewable bar and in a powder that must be mixed with fluids or food. It usually is taken two to four times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take cholestyramine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Take this medication before a meal and/or at bedtime, and try to take any other medications at least 1 hour before or 4 hours after you take cholestyramine because cholestyramine can interfere with their absorption.
Continue to take cholestyramine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking cholestyramine without talking to your doctor. This precaution is especially important if you also take other drugs; changing your cholestyramine dose may change their effects.
Do not take the powder alone. To take the powder, follow these steps:
Stir the powder into a glass of water, milk, heavy or pulpy fruit juices such as orange juice, or other beverage. If you use a carbonated beverage, mix the powder slowly in a large glass to avoid excessive foaming.
Drink the mixture slowly.
Rinse the drinking glass with more of the beverage and drink it to be sure that you get all of the powder.
The powder also may be mixed with applesauce, crushed pineapple, pureed fruit, and soup. Although the powder may be mixed in hot foods, do not heat the powder. To improve the taste and for convenience, you can prepare doses for an entire day on the previous evening and refrigerate them.
To take the chewable bars, chew each bite thoroughly before swallowing.
Drink plenty of liquids while you are taking this medication.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cholestyramine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cholestyramine or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking cholestyramine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart disease, especially angina (heart pain); stomach, intestinal, or gallbladder disease; or phenylketonuria.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking cholestyramine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking cholestyramine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Eat a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet. Be sure to follow all exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian. You can also visit the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) website for additional dietary information at
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/chol/chol_tlc.pdf
.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cholestyramine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
bloating
stomach pain
gas
upset stomach
vomiting
diarrhea
loss of appetite
heartburn
indigestion
If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor immediately:
unusual bleeding (such as bleeding from the gums or rectum)
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to cholestyramine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Locholest
®
Locholest
®
Light
Prevalite
®
Questran
®
Questran
®
Light
Last Revised -
08/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page