Enasidenib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Enasidenib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a617040.html
Enasidenib
pronounced as (en" a sid' a nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Enasidenib may cause a serious or life-threatening group of symptoms called differentiation syndrome. Your doctor will monitor you carefully to see whether you are developing this syndrome. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: fever, sudden weight gain, decreased urination, swelling of your arms, legs, neck, groin, or underarm area, shortness of breath, difficulty breathing, chest pain, cough, or bone pain. At the first sign that you are developing differentiation syndrome, your doctor will prescribe medications to treat the syndrome, and may tell you to stop taking enasidenib for some time.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with enasidenib and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Enasidenib is used to treat a certain type of acute myeloid leukemia (AML; a type of cancer that begins in the white blood cells) that has worsened or come back after treatment with other chemotherapy medications. Enasidenib is in a class of medications called an isocitrate dehydrongenase-2 (IDH2) inhibitor. It works by slowing or stopping the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Enasidenib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food. Take enasidenib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take enasidenib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole with a cup (8 ounces [240 mL]) of water; do not split, chew, or crush them.
If you vomit after taking a dose of enasidenib, take another dose as soon as possible on the same day.
Your doctor may temporarily or permanently stop your treatment, decrease your dose of enasidenib, or treat you with other medications depending on the side effects that you experience. Be sure to talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment. Do not stop taking enasidenib without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking enasidenib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to enasidenib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in enasidenib tablets. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking enasidenib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with enasidenib: omeprazole (Prilosec); dextromethorphan; caffeine supplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking enasidenib. Do not start any of these medications while taking enasidenib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or plan to father a child. You should not become pregnant while you are taking enasidenib. You will need to have a negative pregnancy test before you begin taking this medication. Use effective birth control during your treatment with enasidenib and for one month after your final dose. If you are a male and your partner can become pregnant, you should use effective birth control during your treatment and for one month after your final dose. Enasidenib may decrease the effectiveness of certain oral contraceptives so talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking enasidenib, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are enasidenib and for one month after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking enasidenib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Drink plenty of water or other fluids every day during your treatment with enasidenib,
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it on the same day. However, if it is already the next day, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Enasidenib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
decreased appetite
change in the way things taste
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
yellowing of your eyes or skin
muscle spasms or twitching; burning, prickling, or tingling feeling on the skin; irregular heartbeat; or seizures
Enasidenib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not remove the desiccant (a small packet included with medication to absorb moisture) from the container.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to enasidenib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Idhifa
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page