Grange syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Grange syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/grange-syndrome/
Grange syndrome
Description
Grange syndrome is a rare condition that primarily affects the blood vessels. It is characterized by narrowing (stenosis) or blockage (occlusion) of arteries that supply blood to various organs and tissues, including the kidneys, brain, and heart. Stenosis or occlusion of the arteries that supply blood to the kidneys (renal arteries) can result in chronic high blood pressure (
hypertension
). Blockage of the arteries that carry blood to the brain (cerebral arteries) can cause a
stroke
.
Additional features of Grange syndrome can include short
fingers
and
toes
(brachydactyly), fusion of some of the
fingers
or
toes
(syndactyly), fragile bones that are prone to breakage, and learning disabilities. Most people with this disorder also have heart defects that are present from birth.
Frequency
Grange syndrome has been reported to affect at least six individuals from three families.
Causes
Grange syndrome results from mutations in the
YY1AP1
gene. The protein produced from this gene is part of a group of proteins (a complex) that helps regulate several critical functions within cells. These include gene activity (expression), repair of damaged DNA, cell specialization (differentiation), and cell growth and division (proliferation). Researchers believe that this protein complex plays a particularly important role in smooth muscle cells, which line the
walls of blood vessels
.
Mutations in the
YY1AP1
gene likely disrupt the function of the complex, which leads to reduced proliferation and differentiation of smooth muscle cells. However, it is unclear how these changes lead to narrowing and blockage of arteries. It is also unknown how
YY1AP1
gene mutations are related to other features of Grange syndrome, such as bone abnormalities and learning disabilities.
Learn more about the gene associated with Grange syndrome
YY1AP1
Inheritance
This condition is thought to be inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the
YY1AP1
gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Arterial occlusive disease, progressive, with hypertension, heart defects, bone fragility, and brachysyndactyly
Grange occlusive arterial syndrome
GRNG
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Grange syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
GRANGE SYNDROME; GRNG
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Grange DK, Balfour IC, Chen SC, Wood EG. Familial syndrome of progressive
arterial occlusive disease consistent with fibromuscular dysplasia, hypertension,
congenital cardiac defects, bone fragility, brachysyndactyly, and learning
disabilities. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Feb 17;75(5):469-80. doi:
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980217)75:53.0.co;2-i.
Citation on PubMed
Guo DC, Duan XY, Regalado ES, Mellor-Crummey L, Kwartler CS, Kim D, Lieberman
K, de Vries BBA, Pfundt R, Schinzel A, Kotzot D, Shen X, Yang ML; University of
Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics; Bamshad MJ, Nickerson DA, Gornik HL,
Ganesh SK, Braverman AC, Grange DK, Milewicz DM. Loss-of-Function Mutations in
YY1AP1 Lead to Grange Syndrome and a Fibromuscular Dysplasia-Like Vascular
Disease. Am J Hum Genet. 2017 Jan 5;100(1):21-30. doi:
10.1016/j.ajhg.2016.11.008. Epub 2016 Dec 8.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Volonghi I, Frigerio M, Mardighian D, Gasparotti R, Del Zotto E, Giossi A,
Costa P, Poli L, Jeannin G, Gregorini GA, Padovani A, Pezzini A. Grange syndrome:
an identifiable cause of stroke in young adults. Am J Med Genet A. 2012
Nov;158A(11):2894-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35593. Epub 2012 Sep 17.
Citation on PubMed
Wallerstein R, Augustyn AM, Wallerstein D, Elton L, Tejeiro B, Johnson V,
Lieberman K. A new case of Grange syndrome without cardiac findings. Am J Med
Genet A. 2006 Jun 15;140(12):1316-20. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31125.
Citation on PubMed
Weymann S, Yonekawa Y, Khan N, Martin E, Heppner FL, Schinzel A, Kotzot D.
Severe arterial occlusive disorder and brachysyndactyly in a boy: a further case
of Grange syndrome? Am J Med Genet. 2001 Mar 15;99(3):190-5. doi:
10.1002/1096-8628(2001)9999:99993.0.co;2-r.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Congenital Heart Defects
Genetic Disorders
High Blood Pressure
Stroke
Vascular Diseases
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page