Somatropin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Somatropin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622022.html
Somatropin Injection
pronounced as (soe" ma troe' pin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Somatropin injection is used
to treat growth failure caused by growth hormone deficiency and certain other conditions
to increase body weight and endurance in certain people with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
to treat short bowel syndrome in adults who need special nutrition therapy
Somatropin is a human growth hormone (hGH) analog. It works by replacing growth hormones that are normally produced in the body, which may result in increased growth, body weight, and improved absorption of nutrients and fluids from the intestines.
How should this medicine be used?
Somatropin injection comes as a solution (liquid) in prefilled dosing pens and cartridges and also as a powder in vials and cartridges to be mixed with liquid to be injected subcutaneously (under the skin). Your doctor will tell you how often to use somatropin injection based on your condition and age. Use somatropin injection at around the same time on each scheduled day.
Use somatropin injection exactly as directed. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Do not use more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of somatropin injection and may gradually increase your dose.
You may receive your first dose of somatropin injection in your doctor's office or your doctor may allow you or a caregiver to perform the injections at home. Before you use somatropin injection for the first time, you or the person who will be giving the injections should read the manufacturer's information for the patient that comes with it. These instructions describe how to inject a dose of somatropin. Be sure that you understand these directions. Ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions about how or where to inject the medication or how to dispose of used needles and syringes after you inject the medication.
Continue to use somatropin injection even if you feel well. Do not stop using somatropin injection without talking to your doctor.
Always look at somatropin solution before injecting it. Check that the expiration date has not passed and that the liquid is clear and colorless. The liquid should not contain visible particles. Do not use if it is expired or if the liquid is cloudy or contains particles.
Do not reuse or share syringes, needles, injection pens, or vials of medication. Dispose of used syringes, needles, injection pens, and vials in a puncture resistant container that is out of the reach of children. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using somatropin injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using somatropin injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have recently had heart or stomach surgery, an accident or trauma, or serious breathing problems, or if you have sleep apnea (stopping breathing for short periods of time during sleep), cancer, or diabetic retinopathy (damage to the eyes caused by diabetes). Your doctor may tell you not to use somatropin injection. Somatropin injection should not be used in children whose growth plate has closed and whose bones are no longer growing (usually after puberty).
tell your doctor if you have ever had cancer and were treated with radiation therapy to the head or brain; or if you have or have ever had diabetes; adrenal insufficiency (condition in which the adrenal glands do not produce enough of certain hormones needed for important body functions); pancreatitis (swelling of the pancreas); papilledema (swelling of the optic nerve caused by increased pressure in the brain); scoliosis (curving of the spine); high blood levels of phosphate; or thyroid, or parathyroid problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using somatropin injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using somatropin injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Call your doctor if you forget to inject a dose of this medication. Your doctor will tell you when to inject the missed dose and when to inject your next scheduled dose. Do not inject a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Somatropin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
skin thickening at injection site
injection site pain, redness, swelling, or itching
headache
muscle or joint pain
sore throat, cough, fever, or other signs of infection
ear pain
flatulence or large amounts of gas in the intestines or bowels
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
vision changes, headache, nausea, and vomiting
hives; rash; itching; difficulty breathing or swallowing; sweating; swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, lips, tongue or throat; hoarseness; lightheadedness; fainting; fast or pounding heartbeat; or chest pain
ongoing pain that begins in the stomach area but may spread to the back nausea, vomiting, or loss of appetite
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs; muscle or joint pain; or numbness, burning, tingling, or tingling in the hands, fingers, arms, legs, or feet
excessive tiredness, muscle or joint pain, weakness, lightheadedness, darkening of the skin, or weight loss
new or persistent knee or hip pain, limping
breathing problems, snoring, or sleep apnea
enlarged breasts
Somatropin may increase the risk of developing certain types of cancer, including brain or skin cancer. Call your doctor right away if you have any of the following symptoms: changes in behavior or vision; headaches; or changes in moles, birthmarks, or skin color.
Somatropin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Your healthcare provider will tell you how to store your medication. Store your medication only as directed. Make sure you understand how to store your medication properly.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
excessive sweating and body odor
enlarged hands, feet, lips, nose, and tongue
joint or muscle weakness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to somatropin injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Accretropin
®
Genotropin
®
Humatrope
®
Norditropin
®
Nutropin
®
¶
Nutropin
®
AQ
®
Nuspin
®
Omnitrope
®
Saizen
®
Serostim
®
Zomacton
Zorbtive
®
Other names
Human Growth Hormone
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page