Zenocutuzumab-zbco Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Zenocutuzumab-zbco Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625011.html
Zenocutuzumab-zbco Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should not become pregnant while you are receiving zenocutuzumab-zbco injection and for 2 months after your final dose. You may be asked to have a pregnancy test before starting treatment. You should use birth control during your treatment and for 2 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you become pregnant while receiving zenocutuzumab-zbco injection, call your doctor. Zenocutuzumab-zbco may harm the fetus.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Zenocutuzumab-zbco injection is used to treat certain types of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and pancreatic cancer. Zenocutuzumab-zbco is in a class of medications called immunotherapy. It works by stopping the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Zenocutuzumab-zbco comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected into a vein over 4 hours by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or medical facility. It is usually injected once every 2 weeks. Your doctor will decide the length of your treatment based on how well your body responds to the medication and the side effects that you experience.
Zenocutuzumab-zbco injection may cause serious or life-threatening reactions while the medication is being given. A doctor or nurse will watch you closely while you receive each dose of zenocutuzumab-zbco injection and for at least 1 hour after your first dose. Your doctor may give you other medications before you receive zenocutuzumab-zbco injection to prevent certain side effects. Tell your doctor immediately if you experiences any of the following symptoms during or after your infusion: chills or shaking; fever; itching or rash; feeling lightheaded or faint; dizziness; flushing, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea; swelling of the face, eyes, mouth, throat, tongue, or lips; difficulty breathing or swallowing; chest pain; back or neck pain; shortness of breath or wheezing; or feeling numbness or tingling. Your doctor may need to slow down your infusion or delay or stop your treatment if you experience these or other side effects.
Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving zenocutuzumab-zbco injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to zenocutuzumab-zbco injection, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in zenocutuzumab-zbco injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had lung or breathing problems other than lung cancer; heart failure or any other heart problems; lower than normal levels of sodium, magnesium, or phosphate in your blood; or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. You should not breastfeed while receiving zenocutuzumab-zbco injection and for 2 months after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving zenocutuzumab-zbco injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive zenocutuzumab-zbco injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Zenocutuzumab-zbco injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
constipation
stomach swelling or pain
mouth sores
unusual tiredness and weakness
muscle, joint, or bone pain
decreased appetite
dry skin
feeling anxious
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the HOWsection, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
new or worsening trouble breathing, shortness of breath, cough, or fever
swelling of the ankles, or lower legs; sudden weight gain; dizziness; loss of consciousness; or fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat
nosebleeds or other unusual bleeding or bruising
Zenocutuzumab-zbco injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests before and during your treatment to see if it's safe for you to receive zenocutuzumab-zbco injection and to check your body's response to zenocutuzumab-zbco injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Bizengri
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page