Axatilimab-csfr Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Axatilimab-csfr Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624043.html
Axatilimab-csfr Injection
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Axatilimab-csfr injection is used to treat graft versus host disease (GVHD; a condition in which the donor-supplied organ, tissues or cells attack the organ recipient) in adults and some children who have not responded to two other therapies. Axatilimab-csfr is in a class of medications called monoclonal antibodies. It works by stopping the immune system from attacking the newly transplanted tissue, cells, or bone marrow.
How should this medicine be used?
Axatilimab-csfr comes as a solution (liquid) to be given intravenously (into the vein) by a doctor or nurse at a hospital or clinic. It is given over 30 minutes every 2 weeks. Your doctor will decide how long you should receive axatilimab-csfr.
Your doctor will draw labs to check for side effects axatilimab-csfr. Your doctor may adjust your dose or interrupt your therapy based on these results. Your doctor may give you other medications before receiving axatilimab-csfr to prevent infusion-related side effects (fever, chills, rash, flushing, difficulty breathing). It is important that you tell your doctor or nurse how you feel during treatment.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving axatilimab-csfr injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You may need a pregnancy test before you start treatment. Use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your axatilimab-csfr treatment and for 30 days after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will be best for you. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking axatilimab-csfr, call your doctor.Axatilimab-csfr may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed during your treatment with axatilimab-csfr and for at least 30 days after your final dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving axatilimab-csfr.
do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Axatilimab-csfr may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
muscle, bone or joint pain
low energy
nausea
headache
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, cough, shortness of breath
lower abdominal pain, yellowing of skin or whites of eyes, dark urine
severe upper abdominal pain, tenderness in the upper abdomen, fever
fever, difficulty or painful urination or frequent urination, lower back pain
low energy, pale skin, chest pain, shortness of breath
Axatilimab-csfr may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to axatilimab-csfr.
If you miss an appointment to receive your dose, call your doctor right away.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Niktimvo
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page