Oxaliplatin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Oxaliplatin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607035.html
Oxaliplatin Injection
pronounced as (ox al'' i pla' tin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Oxaliplatin may cause severe allergic reactions. These allergic reactions may happen within a few minutes after you receive oxaliplatin and may cause death. Tell your doctor if you are allergic to oxaliplatin, carboplatin (Paraplatin), cisplatin (Platinol) or any other medications. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor or other healthcare provider immediately: rash, hives, itching, reddening of the skin, difficulty breathing or swallowing, hoarseness, feeling as if your throat is closing, swelling of the lips and tongue, dizziness, lightheadness, or fainting.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Oxaliplatin is used with other medications to treat advanced colon or rectal cancer (cancer that begins in the large intestine). Oxaliplatin is also used with other medications to prevent colon cancer from spreading in people who have had surgery to remove the tumor. Oxaliplatin is in a class of medications called platinum-containing antineoplastic agents. It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Oxaliplatin comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected into a vein. Oxaliplatin is administered by a doctor or nurse. It is usually given once every fourteen days.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using oxaliplatin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving oxaliplatin injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. Oxaliplatin may harm the fetus. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with oxaliplatin. Talk to your doctor about types of birth control that will work for you.If you become pregnant while taking oxaliplatin, call your doctor. Do not breast-feed during your treatment with oxaliplatin.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using oxaliplatin.
you should know that oxaliplatin may decrease your ability to fight infection. Stay away from people who are sick during your treatment with oxaliplatin.
you should know that exposure to cold air or objects may make some of the side effects of oxaliplatin worse. You should not eat or drink anything colder than room temperature, touch any cold objects, go near air conditioners or freezers, wash your hands in cold water, or go outside in cold weather unless absolutely necessary for five days after you receive each dose of oxaliplatin. If you must go outside in cold weather, wear a hat, gloves, and a scarf, and cover your mouth and nose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
Do not eat or drink anything that is colder than room temperature for five days after you receive each dose of oxaliplatin.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Call your doctor as soon as possible if you are unable to keep an appointment to receive oxaliplatin. It is very important that you receive your treatment on schedule.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Oxaliplatin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
numbness, burning, or tingling in the fingers, toes, hands, feet, mouth, or throat
pain in the hands or feet
increased sensitivity, especially to cold
decreased sense of touch
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
gas
stomach pain
heartburn
sores in the mouth
loss of appetite
change in the ability to taste food
weight gain or loss
hiccups
dry mouth
muscle, back, or joint pain
tiredness
anxiety
depression
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
hair loss
dry skin
redness or peeling of the skin on the hands and feet
sweating
flushing
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
stumbling or loss of balance when walking
difficulty with everyday activities such as writing or fastening buttons
difficulty speaking
strange feeling in the tongue
tightening of the jaw
chest pain or pressure
cough
shortness of breath
sore throat, fever, chills, and other signs of infection
pain, redness, or swelling in the place where oxaliplatin was injected
pain when urinating
decreased urination
unusual bruising or bleeding
nosebleed
blood in urine
vomit that is bloody or looks like coffee grounds
bright red blood in stool
black and tarry stools
pale skin
weakness
problems with vision
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
Oxaliplatin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
shortness of breath
wheezing
numbness or tingling in the fingers or toes
vomiting
chest pain
slowed breathing
slowed heartbeat
tightening of the throat
diarrhea
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to oxaliplatin.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Eloxatin
®
Last Reviewed -
09/01/2010
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page