Bacitracin Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bacitracin Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613017.html
Bacitracin Ophthalmic
pronounced as (bas'' i tray' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ophthalmic bacitracin is used to treat bacterial infections of the eye. Bacitracin is in a class of medications called antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria that cause infections.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic bacitracin comes as an ointment to apply to the eyes. It is usually applied one to three times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use bacitracin eye ointment exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should expect your symptoms to improve during your treatment. Call your doctor if your symptoms get worse or do not go away, or if you develop other problems with your eyes during your treatment.
Use ophthalmic bacitracin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using ophthalmic bacitracin too soon, your infection may not be completely cured and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
To use the eye ointment, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Use a mirror or have someone else apply the ointment.
Avoid touching the tip of the tube against your eye or anything else. The ointment must be kept clean.
Tilt your head forward slightly.
Holding the tube between your thumb and index finger, place the tube as near as possible to your eyelid without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your cheek or nose.
With the index finger of your other hand, pull the lower lid of your eye down to form a pocket.
Place a small amount of ointment into the pocket made by the lower lid and the eye. A 1/2 inch (1.25-centimeter) strip of ointment usually is enough unless otherwise directed by your doctor.
Look downward, then gently close your eyes and keep them closed for 1 to 2 minutes to allow the medication to be absorbed.
Replace and tighten the cap right away.
Wipe off any excess ointment from your eyelids and lashes with a clean tissue. Do not rub your eyes, even if your vision is blurry. Wash your hands again.
If your doctor has told you to use bacitracin eye ointment to treat an infection on your eyelids, carefully wipe your eyelids with water to remove scales and crusts. Then spread a small amount of the ointment evenly over the affected eyelid areas.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using bacitracin eye ointment,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bacitracin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in bacitracin eye ointment. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any other eye medications.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using bacitracin eye ointment, call your doctor.
you should know that your vision may be blurry for a short amount of time after using the eye ointment. Wait until you can see normally before you drive or do other activities that require good vision.
tell your doctor if you wear soft contact lenses. You should not wear contact lenses if you have an eye infection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra ointment to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bacitracin eye ointment may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
itching, stinging, or burning of the eye
Bacitracin eye ointment may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Cortisporin
®
(containing Bacitracin Zinc, Hydrocortisone, Neomycin, Polymyxin B Sulfates)
Ocu-Cort
®
(containing Bacitracin Zinc, Hydrocortisone, Neomycin, Polymyxin B Sulfates)
Polysporin
®
(containing Bacitracin Zinc, Polymyxin B Sulfates)
Last Revised -
01/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page