Methazolamide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Methazolamide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613034.html
Methazolamide
pronounced as (meth'' a zol' a mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Methazolamide is used to treat glaucoma (a condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision). Methazolamide is in a class of medications called carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. It works by decreasing the pressure in the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Methazolamide comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken two or three times a day. Take methazolamide at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take methazolamide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Methazolamide controls glaucoma but does not cure it. Continue to take methazolamide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking methazolamide without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking methazolamide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to methazolamide, sulfa drugs, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in methazolamide tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking methazolamide. . Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription product may interact with methazolamide: aspirin. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking methazolamide. Do not start any of these medications while taking methazolamide without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver, kidney, or adrenal gland disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take methazolamide.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had lung disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking methazolamide, call your doctor.
you should know that methazolamide may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Methazolamide may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Methazolamide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
hearing problems or ringing in the ears
tiredness or lack of energy
vomiting or diarrhea
change in how things taste
increased urination
vision changes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
blisters or peeling skin
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
fever, sore throat, chills, and other signs of infection
unusual bruising or bleeding
muscle weakness
seizures
nausea
extreme tiredness
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
flu-like symptoms
Methazolamide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to methazolamide.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Neptazane
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
02/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page