Letermovir Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Letermovir Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618007.html
Letermovir Injection
pronounced as (le term' oh vir)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Letermovir injection is used to help prevent cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection and disease in certain people who have received a hematopoietic stem-cell transplant (HSCT; a procedure that replaces diseased bone marrow with healthy bone marrow) and are at increased risk of developing a CMV infection. Letermovir injection is also used to help prevent CMV infection and disease in certain people who have received a kidney transplant and are at increased risk of developing a CMV infection. Letermovir is in a class of medications called antivirals. It works by slowing the growth of CMV.
How should this medicine be used?
Letermovir injection comes as a liquid to be diluted and given intravenously (into a vein). It is usually injected slowly over a period of 1 hour. It is usually given once a day for as long as you are unable to take letermovir by mouth.
You may receive letermovir injection in a hospital, or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving letermovir injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using letermovir injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to letermovir, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in letermovir injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with letermovir injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with letermovir injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting letermovir injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while receiving letermovir injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with letermovir injection: St. John's wort; omeprazole (Prilosec). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start receiving letermovir injection. Do not start any of these medications while receiving letermovir injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had hearing problems or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using letermovir injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using letermovir injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Letermovir injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
abdominal pain
swelling of your arms or legs
headache
extreme tiredness
cough
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately:
fast or irregular heartbeat, feeling weak or dizzy, shortness of breath, or chest pain
Letermovir injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to letermovir.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Prevymis
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page