Azacitidine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Azacitidine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607068.html
Azacitidine Injection
pronounced as (ay za site' i deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Azacitidine is used to treat myelodysplastic syndrome (a group of conditions in which the bone marrow produces blood cells that are misshapen and does not produce enough healthy blood cells). Azacitidine is in a class of medications called demethylation agents. It works by helping the bone marrow to produce normal blood cells and by killing abnormal cells in the bone marrow.
How should this medicine be used?
Azacitidine comes as a powder to be mixed with water and injected subcutaneously (under the skin) or intravenously (into a vein) by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or hospital outpatient department. It is usually injected once a day for 7 days. This treatment may be repeated every 4 weeks for as long as your doctor recommends. Treatment should usually be given for at least four cycles.
Your doctor may increase your dose of azacitidine after two cycles if your condition has not improved and if you have not experienced serious side effects of the medication. Your doctor may also need to delay your treatment or reduce your dose if you experience certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with azacitadine.
Your doctor will give you medication to prevent nausea and vomiting before you receive each dose of azacitadine.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using azacitidine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to azacitidine, mannitol (Osmitrol, Resectisol), or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have a liver tumor. Your doctor may tell you not to take azacitidine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are using azacitidine. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy in yourself or your partner during your treatment with azacitidine. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner become pregnant while using azacitidine, call your doctor. Azacitidine may harm the fetus.
do not breastfeed while you are using azacitidine.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using azacitidine.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Call your doctor right away if you are unable to keep an appointment to receive a dose of azacitidine.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Azacitidine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
sores on the mouth or tongue
hemorrhoids
stomach pain or tenderness
heartburn
loss of appetite
weight loss
headache
dizziness
weakness
excessive tiredness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
depression
anxiety
back, muscle, or joint pain
muscle cramps
sweating
night sweats
difficulty urinating or pain when urinating
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
dry skin
redness, pain, bruising, swelling, itching, lump, or change in the skin color in the place where the medication was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
pale skin
shortness of breath
fast heartbeat
chest pain
cough
unusual bruising or bleeding
nosebleeds
bleeding gums
small red or purple dots on the skin
sore throat, fever, chills, or other signs of infection
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
Azacitidine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
This medication will be stored in the medical office or hospital where you receive your treatment.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to azacitidine.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vidaza
®
Other names
Ladakamycin
Last Reviewed -
09/01/2010
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page