Amoxicillin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Amoxicillin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a685001.html
Amoxicillin
pronounced as (a mox I sil' in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Amoxicillin is used to treat certain infections caused by bacteria, such as pneumonia; bronchitis (infection of the airway tubes leading to the lungs); and infections of the ears, nose, throat, urinary tract, and skin. It is also used in combination with other medications to eliminate
H. pylori
, a bacteria that causes ulcers. Amoxicillin is in a class of medications called penicillin-like antibiotics. It works by stopping the growth of bacteria.
Antibiotics such as amoxicillin will not work for colds, flu, and other viral infections. Taking antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Amoxicillin comes as a capsule, a tablet, a chewable tablet, and as a suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken every 12 hours (twice a day) or every 8 hours (three times a day). Amoxicillin may be taken with food to prevent stomach upset. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection that you have. Take amoxicillin at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take amoxicillin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the suspension well before each use to mix the medication evenly. The suspension may be placed directly on the child's tongue or added to formula, milk, fruit juice, water, ginger ale, or another cold liquid and taken immediately.
If you are taking the chewable tablets, chew these tablets completely before swallowing.
If you are taking the suspension, do not use a household spoon to measure your dose. Use a properly marked measuring device such as a medicine spoon or oral syringe. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you need help getting or using a measuring device.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with amoxicillin. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Take amoxicillin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking amoxicillin too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
Amoxicillin also is sometimes used to treat Lyme disease, to prevent anthrax infection after exposure, and to treat anthrax infection of the skin . Talk with your doctor about the possible risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking amoxicillin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to amoxicillin, penicillin antibiotics, cephalosporin antibiotics, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in amoxicillin capsules, tablets, chewable tablets, or suspension. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking amoxicillin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
You should know that amoxicillin may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills). You will need to use another method of contraception to prevent pregnancy while taking amoxicillin. Talk to your doctor about other ways to prevent pregnancy while you are taking this medication.
tell your doctor if you have mononucleosis (a virus; also called 'mono') and if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease, allergies, asthma, hay fever, or hives.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking amoxicillin, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Amoxicillin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
temporary discoloration (yellow, brown, or gray color) of your teeth
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking amoxicillin and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
skin blisters or peeling
itching
hives
wheezing
difficulty swallowing or breathing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, and eyes
prolonged vomiting (occurring 1 to 4 hours after taking amoxicillin), diarrhea, extreme tiredness, and paleness that may occur within 24 hours of taking amoxicillin
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
Amoxicillin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the capsules and tablets at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). The liquid medication preferably should be kept in the refrigerator, but it may be stored at room temperature. Do not freeze. Dispose of any unused liquid medication after 14 days.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
cloudy or bloody urine
decreased urination
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to amoxicillin.
If you are diabetic, use Clinistix or TesTape (not Clinitest) to test your urine for sugar while taking this medication.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the amoxicillin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Amoxil
®
Dispermox
®
¶
Larotid
®
Suspension
Polymox
®
Suspension
¶
Trimox
®
¶
Wymox
®
¶
Talicia (as a combination product containing Amoxicillin, Omeprazole, Rifabutin)
Other names
p-Hydroxyampicillin
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
08/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page