Lusutrombopag: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lusutrombopag
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618043.html
Lusutrombopag
pronounced as (loo" soo trom' boe pag)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Lusutrombopag is used treat thrombocytopenia (a low number of platelets [type of blood cell needed for blood clotting]) in patients with chronic (ongoing) liver disease who are scheduled to have a medical or dental procedure to help prevent bleeding complications. Lusutrombopag is in a class of medications called thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor agonists. It works by causing the body to produce more platelets.
How should this medicine be used?
Lusutrombopag comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day for 7 days, starting 8 to 14 days before the scheduled procedure. Take lusutrombopag at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take lusutrombopag exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking lusutrombopag,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lusutrombopag, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in lusutrombopag tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a blood clot or a genetic condition that could lead to blood clots.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking lusutrombopag, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Your doctor will probably tell you not to breastfeed during your treatment and for 4 weeks after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it on the same day. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lusutrombopag may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately:
swollen, painful, red, or tender leg
shortness of breath, cough, chest pain, fast heartbeat
stomach pain or tenderness
Lusutrombopag may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
swollen, painful, red or tender leg
shortness of breath, cough, chest pain, fast heartbeat
stomach pain or tenderness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to lusutrombopag.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Mulpleta
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page