Dinoprostone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dinoprostone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682512.html
Dinoprostone
pronounced as (dye noe prost' one)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dinoprostone is used to prepare the cervix for the induction of labor in pregnant women who are at or near term. This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Dinoprostone comes as a vaginal insert and as a gel that is inserted high into the vagina. It is administered using a syringe, by a health professional in a hospital or clinic setting. After the dose has been administered you should remain lying down for up to 2 hours as directed by your physician. A second dose of the gel may be administered in 6 hours if the first dose does not produce the desired response.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking dinoprostone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dinoprostone or any other drugs.
some medications should not be taken with dinoprostone. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with dinoprostone. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting dinoprostone with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking dinoprostone, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma; anemia; a cesarean section or any other uterine surgery; diabetes; high or low blood pressure; placenta previa; a seizure disorder; six or more previous term pregnancies; glaucoma or increased pressure in the eye; cephalopelvic disproportion; previous difficult or traumatic deliveries; unexplained vaginal bleeding; or heart, liver, or kidney disease.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Side effects from dinoprostone are not common, but they can occur. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
upset stomach
vomiting
diarrhea
dizziness
flushing of the skin
headache
fever
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
unpleasant vaginal discharge
continued fever
chills and shivering
increase in vaginal bleeding several days after treatment
chest pain or tightness
skin rash
hives
difficulty breathing
unusual swelling of the face
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Dinoprostone gel should be stored in a refrigerator. The inserts should be stored in a freezer. Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Do not let anyone else use your medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cervidil
®
Prepidil
®
Prostin E2
®
Last Reviewed -
09/01/2010
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page