Budesonide Oral Suspension (Eosinophilic Esophagitis): MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Budesonide Oral Suspension (Eosinophilic Esophagitis)
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624013.html
Budesonide Oral Suspension (Eosinophilic Esophagitis)
pronounced as (bue des' oh nide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Budesonide oral suspension is used to treat eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE; a condition that involves high levels of blood cells in the esophagus [tube that connects the mouth to the stomach] that may damage tissues of the esophagus) in adults and children 11 years of age or older. Budesonide is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by decreasing inflammation (swelling) in the esophagus of people who have EoE.
How should this medicine be used?
Budesonide oral suspension comes as a suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken without food (at least 30 minutes before eating or drinking anything) twice a day for up to 12 weeks. Take budesonide oral suspension at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take budesonide oral suspension exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Budesonide oral suspension comes in stick packs that are intended for single use. Shake the stick pack for at least 10 seconds before opening. After opening the top, squeeze the stick pack from bottom to top to dispense contents directly into the mouth, Repeat this 2 to 3 times until the stick pack is empty. Swallow all of the suspension and avoid eating or drinking anything for 30 minutes. After 30 minutes, rinse mouth with water and spit out the contents without swallowing.
Your doctor may change your dose if needed. Do not change your dose or stop taking budesonide oral suspension unless told to by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking budesonide oral suspension,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to budesonide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in budesonide oral suspension. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking budesonide suspension. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has had diabetes (high blood sugar) or glaucoma, or if you have high blood pressure, osteoporosis (a condition in which the bones become thin and weak and break easily), stomach ulcer, cataracts, allergies, or liver disease. tell your doctor if have or had tuberculosis or exposure to tuberculosis, hepatitis B infection, amebiasis (a parasitic infection of the intestine) or have spent time in the tropics or have unexplained diarrhea, fungal infections such as recurrent yeast infections or toenail or foot fungal infections or other chronic fungal infections such as blastomycoses, histoplasmosis, or cryptococcus, strongyloides (threadworm) infection, malaria, or herpes.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking budesonide suspension, call your doctor.
you should know that this medication should not be generally used in older adults because it can cause is not as safe or effective as other medication(s) that can be used to treat your condition. If you are 65 years of age or older, talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking this medication.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking budesonide suspension.
tell your doctor if you have never had chicken pox or measles and you have not been vaccinated against these infections. Stay away from people who are sick, especially people who have chicken pox or measles. If you are exposed to one of these infections or if you develop symptoms of one of these infections, call your doctor right away. You may need treatment to protect you from these infections.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Budesonide suspension may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
dry or sore throat
stuffy or runny nose, cough, nasal or chest congestion
dry and itchy skin, sneezing, runny nose or watery eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately {or get emergency medical treatment}:
acne, rounding of your face, ankle swelling, thicker body hair or facial hair, hump between your shoulders, stretch marks on your skin
tiredness, weakness, nausea and vomiting, low blood pressure (dizziness when get from laying or sitting down to standing
fever, chills, abdominal pain, aches, diarrhea, feeling tired
heartburn, chest pain, trouble swallowing
purple, brown or red lesions that appear on skin that may be flat or raised
rash, throat swelling, or difficulty breathing
Budesonide suspension may cause osteoporosis, growth retardation in children. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Budesonide suspension may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it in refrigerator or at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Eohilia
®
Last Revised -
08/01/2015
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page