Remdesivir Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Remdesivir Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620033.html
Remdesivir Injection
pronounced as (rem de' si vir)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Remdesivir injection is used to treat coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19 infection) caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus in hospitalized adults and children who weigh at least 3 pounds (1.5 kg). Remdesivir injection is also used to treat coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19 infection) caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus in non-hospitalized adults and children 28 days and older who weigh at least 6.6 pounds (3 kg) who are at high risk of progression to severe COVID-19, including hospitalization and death. Remdesivir is in a class of medications called antivirals. It works by stopping the virus from spreading in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Remdesivir comes as a solution (liquid) and as a powder to be mixed with liquid and infused (injected slowly) into a vein over 30 to 120 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or other healthcare setting. For hospitalized patients with severe COVID-19, it is usually given once daily for 5 to 10 days. The length of your treatment depends on how well your body responds to the medication. For non-hospitalized mild to moderate COVID-19, it is started within 7 days of first symptoms and given once daily for 3 days.
Remdesivir injection may cause serious reactions during and after the infusion of the medication; most reactions usually occur within 1 hour after your infusion starts. A doctor or nurse will monitor you carefully while you are receiving the medication and for at least 1 hour after your infusion. Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms during or after the infusion: chills or shivering; fever; nausea; vomiting; sweating; dizziness upon standing up; rash; wheezing or shortness of breath; abnormally fast or slow heartbeat; or swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes. Your doctor may need to slow down your infusion or stop your treatment if you experience these side effects.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving remdesivir,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to remdesivir, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in remdesivir injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking remdesivir. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Remdesivir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
pain, bleeding, bruising of the skin, soreness, or swelling near the place where the medication was injected
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those in the HOW section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
yellow eyes or skin; dark urine; or pain or discomfort in right upper stomach area
Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to remdesivir.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about remdesivir injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Veklury
®
Other names
GS-5734
Last Revised -
04/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page