Suvorexant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Suvorexant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a614046.html
Suvorexant
pronounced as (soo'' voe rex' ant)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Suvorexant is used to treat insomnia (difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep). Suvorexant is in a class of medications called central nervous system depressants. It works by blocking the action of a substance in the brain that helps you to fall asleep faster and stay asleep longer.
How should this medicine be used?
Suvorexant comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take once a day, if needed, no earlier than 30 minutes before bedtime. Suvorexant may be taken with or without food but will begin to work faster if taken on an empty stomach.
Take suvorexant exactly as directed. Never take more than one dose of suvorexant per day even if you are still having trouble falling asleep or staying asleep.
You will probably become very sleepy soon after you take suvorexant and will remain sleepy for some time after you take the medication. Plan to go to bed right after you take the medication. Stay in bed for at least 7 hours. Do not take suvorexant if you will be unable to stay in bed for at least 7 hours after taking the medication. If you get up too soon after taking suvorexant, you may become drowsy and have difficulty driving or performing tasks that require alertness.
Your sleep problems should improve within 7 to 10 days after you start taking suvorexant. Call your doctor if your sleep problems do not improve during this time or if they get worse at any time during your treatment.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of suvorexant and may gradually increase your dose if your insomnia does not improve. Your doctor may also decrease your dose of suvorexant or tell you to stop taking the medication if it makes you feel too drowsy during the day.
Suvorexant may be habit forming. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or take it for a longer period of time than prescribed by your doctor.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with suvorexant and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking suvorexant,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking suvorexant. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have narcolepsy (a condition that causes extreme daytime sleepiness). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take suvorexant.
tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, use or have ever used street drugs, or have overused prescription medications. Also tell your doctor if you are overweight, and if you have or have ever had depression; mental illness; thoughts of harming or killing yourself or trying to do so; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; a group of diseases that affect the lungs and airways); sleep apnea (condition in which breathing briefly stops many times during the night); any other lung or breathing problems; muscle weakness that happens suddenly; or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking suvorexant, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking suvorexant.
you should know that suvorexant may cause drowsiness, decreased mental alertness, and problems with coordination the day after you take it, and these effects may last several days after stopping the medication. This may increase the risk of falls that can cause serious injury, especially if you are elderly. Suvorexant may also impair your driving skills and increase the risk of falling asleep while driving. Your ability to drive or operate machinery the day after you take suvorexant may be impaired even if you feel fully awake. Do not drive a car, operate machinery, or do any dangerous activity within 8 hours of taking suvorexant and until you feel fully awake. Talk to your doctor about the risks of driving or operating machinery after taking suvorexant.
do not drink alcohol while you are taking suvorexant. Alcohol can make the side effects from suvorexant worse.
you should know that some people who took suvorexant got out of bed and drove their cars, prepared and ate food, had sex, made phone calls, or were involved in other activities while partially asleep. After they woke up, these people were usually unable to remember what they had done. Call your doctor right away if you find out that you have been driving or doing anything else unusual while you were sleeping.
you should know that your behavior and mental health may change in unexpected ways while you are taking this medication. These changes may be caused by suvorexant or they may be caused by physical or mental illnesses that you already have or that you develop during your treatment. Tell your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: aggressiveness, strange or unusually outgoing behavior, hallucinations (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist), feeling as if you are outside of your body, memory problems, anxiety, new or worsening depression, thinking about killing yourself or trying to do so, confusion, and any other changes in your usual thoughts, mood, or behavior. Be sure that your family knows which symptoms may be serious so that they can call the doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually taken as needed. You may take suvorexant even if it is later than the usual time, as long as you will be able to remain in bed for at least 7 hours after you take it.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Suvorexant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
dizziness
headache
unusual dreams
dry mouth
cough
diarrhea
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
temporary inability to move or speak for up to several minutes while going to sleep or waking up
temporary leg weakness during the day or at night
Suvorexant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Store suvorexant in a safe place so that no one else can take it accidentally or on purpose. Keep track of how many tablets are left so you will know if any are missing.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
extreme drowsiness
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Suvorexant is a controlled substance. Prescriptions may be refilled only a limited number of times; ask your pharmacist if you have any questions.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Belsomra
®
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page