Co-trimoxazole Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Co-trimoxazole Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601165.html
Co-trimoxazole Injection
pronounced as (coe try mox' a zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Co-trimoxazole (a combination of sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim) injection is used to treat certain infections that are caused by bacteria. Co-trimoxazole injection is in a class of medications called sulfonamides. It works by stopping the growth of bacteria.
Antibiotics will not work to kill viruses.
How should this medicine be used?
Co-trimoxazole injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be mixed with additional liquid to be injected intravenously (into a vein) over 60 to 90 minutes. It is given every 6, 8, or 12 hours. The length of your treatment depends on the type of infection you have and how your body responds to the medication.
You may receive co-trimoxazole injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving co-trimoxazole injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with co-trimoxazole injection. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Use co-trimoxazole injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop using co-trimoxazole injection too soon or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving co-trimoxazole injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving co-trimoxazole injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a low number of platelets caused by taking sulfonamides or trimethoprim or abnormal red blood cells caused by folate deficiency (low blood levels of folic acid. Your doctor may tell you not to use co-trimoxazole injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma, low levels of folic acid in the body, severe allergies, a glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6-PD) deficiency (an inherited blood disease), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, porphyria (an inherited blood disease that may cause skin or nervous system problems), or thyroid, liver, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using co-trimoxazole injection, call your doctor immediately. Co-trimoxazole can harm the fetus.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Co-trimoxazole injection may make your skin sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
Drink plenty of fluids during your treatment with co-trimoxazole injection.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Co-trimoxazole injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
diarrhea
joint or muscle pain
pain or irritation at the site of injection
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, itching, hives, peeling or blistering skin
a return of fever, sore throat, chills, cough, or other signs of infection
shortness of breath
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
fast heartbeat
hunger, headache, tiredness, sweating, shaking of a part of your body that you cannot control, irritability, blurry vision, difficulty concentrating, or loss of consciousness
yellowing of the skin or eyes
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs, hoarseness, difficulty breathing or swallowing
unusual bleeding or bruising, red or purple skin discolorations
paleness
swelling at the injection site
decreased urination
seizure
fever; rash; yellowing of skin and eyes; tenderness of abdomen; nausea, vomiting, diarrhea; swollen lymph nodes
Co-trimoxazole injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to co-trimoxazole injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving co-trimoxazole injection.
Co-trimoxazole injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Bactrim
®
Injection (containing Sulfamethoxazole, Trimethoprim)
¶
Septra
®
Injection (containing Sulfamethoxazole, Trimethoprim)
¶
Other names
Co-trimoxazole Injection
Sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim
SMX-TMP Injection
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page