Apalutamide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Apalutamide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618018.html
Apalutamide
pronounced as (a' puh loo" tuh mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Apalutamide is used to treat certain types of prostate cancer (cancer in men that begins in the prostate [a male reproductive gland]) and has spread to other parts of the body or that has not spread to other parts of the body but has not been helped by other medical treatments. Apalutamide is in a class of medications called androgen receptor inhibitors. It works by blocking the effects of androgen (a male reproductive hormone) to stop the growth and spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Apalutamide comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day. Take apalutamide at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take apalutamide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablet(s) whole; do not split, chew, or crush them. If you cannot swallow the tablet(s) whole, talk to your doctor or pharmacist. Carefully read the manufacturer's instructions for use that comes with the medication. These instructions describe how to prepare and take a dose of apalutamide tablets if you can not swallow them whole. Be sure to ask your pharmacist or doctor if you have any questions.
Apalutamide tablets may also be given in certain types of feeding tubes. If you have a feeding tube, ask your doctor how you should take the medication. Follow your doctor's directions carefully.
Your doctor may decrease your dose or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment if you experience serious side effects during your treatment. Be sure to talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment with apalutamide.
If your doctor has prescribed another medication such as goserelin (Zoladex), histrelin (Supprelin LA, Vantas), leuprolide (Camcevi, Eligard, Fensolvi, Lupron), or triptorelin (Trelstar, Triptodur) to treat your prostate cancer, you will need to continue receiving this medication during your treatment with apalutamide.
Continue to take apalutamide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking apalutamide without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking apalutamide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to apalutamide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in apalutamide tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with apalutamide: fexofenadine (Allegra) and omeprazole (Prilosec OTC, Zegerid OTC). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking apalutamide. Do not start these medications while taking apalutamide without discussing it with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart problems such as a heart attack, angina (chest pain), heart failure, or hypertension or a stroke or ministroke. Also, tell your doctor if you have ever had seizures, a brain injury, a brain tumor, high cholesterol, diabetes, thyroid problems, or osteoporosis.
you should know that apalutamide is only for use in men. Women should not take this medication, especially if they are or may become pregnant or are breastfeeding. If taken by pregnant women, apalutamide may harm the fetus. If a pregnant woman takes apalutamide, she should call her doctor immediately.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men. However, you should not assume that your female partner cannot become pregnant. If your partner is pregnant, you must use a condom whenever you have sex during your treatment with apalutamide and for three months after your final dose. If your partner is not pregnant but could become pregnant, you must use a condom and another form of birth control whenever you have sex during your treatment and for 3 months after your final dose. Do not donate semen or sperm while you are taking apalutamide and for 3 months after your final dose.
you should know that apalutamide may cause seizures. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that apalutamide may cause your muscles and bones to get weak, which may increase your risk of falling and breaking a bone.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if you do not remember until the next day, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take more than one dose in one day and do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Apalutamide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
weakness
tiredness
joint pain
muscle weakness or stiffness
diarrhea
nausea
loss of appetite
weight loss
hot flashes
swelling of the arms, legs, hands, or feet
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
seizures
loss of consciousness
falling
broken bones or fractures
chest pain, shortness of breath, or swelling of the feet or ankles
numbness or weakness of face, arm, or leg, especially on one side of the body; difficulty talking or understanding; difficulty seeing in one or both eyes; dizziness; loss of balance or coordination; or difficulty walking
rash; blisters or sores on the skin or in the mouth, throat, nose, eyes, or genital area; skin peeling; fever or flu-like symptoms; or swollen glands
cough, shortness of breath, fever, or extreme tiredness
Apalutamide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to apalutamide.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Erleada
®
Last Revised -
10/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page