Latanoprost Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Latanoprost Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a697003.html
Latanoprost Ophthalmic
pronounced as (la ta' noe prost)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Latanoprost ophthalmic is used to treat glaucoma (a condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision) and ocular hypertension (a condition which causes increased pressure in the eye). Latanoprost is in a class of medications called prostaglandin analogs. It lowers pressure in the eye by increasing the flow of natural eye fluids out of the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Latanoprost comes as eye drops. Usually, one drop is applied to the affected eye(s) once a day in the evening. If latanoprost is used with other topical eye medications, allow at least 5 minutes between each medication. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use latanoprost exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Latanoprost controls glaucoma but does not cure it. Continue to use latanoprost even if you feel well. Do not stop using latanoprost without talking to your doctor.
To apply the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Use a mirror or have someone else put the drops in your eye.
Make sure the end of the dropper is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper against your eye or anything else.
Hold the dropper tip down at all times to prevent drops from flowing back into the bottle and contaminating the remaining contents.
Lie down or tilt your head back.
Holding the bottle between your thumb and index finger, place the dropper as near as possible to your eyelid without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your cheek or nose.
With the index finger of your other hand, pull the lower lid of the eye down to form a pocket.
Drop the prescribed number of drops into the pocket made by the lower lid and the eye. Placing the drops on the surface of the eyeball can cause stinging.
Close your eye and press lightly against the lower lid with your finger for 2 to 3 minutes to keep the medication in the eye. Do not blink.
Replace and tighten the cap right away. Do not wipe or rinse it off.
Wipe off any excess liquid from your cheek with a clean tissue. Wash your hands again.
If you still have symptoms of glaucoma (eye pain or blurred vision) after using this medication for a couple of days, call your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using latanoprost,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to latanoprost or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have inflammation of the eye, and if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using latanoprost, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using latanoprost.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you forget a dose, continue with the next dose as normal. Do not double up on a dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Latanoprost may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stinging, burning, itching, watering, or swelling of the eye
redness of the eyelids
irritation
dry eyes
Latanoprost may increase the brown pigmentation in your iris, changing your eye color to brown. The pigmentation changes may be more noticeable in patients who already have some brown eye coloring. Latanoprost may also cause your eyelashes to grow longer and thicker and darken in color. These changes usually occurs slowly, but they may be permanent. If you use latanoprost in only one eye, you should know that there may be a difference between your eyes after using latanoprost. Call your doctor if you notice these changes.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Unopened bottles should be stored in the refrigerator. Once opened, the bottle can be kept at room temperature for either 6 weeks (Xalatan) or 30 days (Iyuzeh). For Xelpros, the bottle should continue to be kept in the refrigerator, even after opening, until the expiration date on the bottle.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will order certain eye tests to check your response to latanoprost.
Remove contact lenses before using latanoprost. You may replace the lenses 15 minutes after applying latanoprost.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xalatan
®
Iyuzeh
®
Xelpros
®
Rocklatan
®
(as a combination product containing Latanoprost, Netarsudil)
Last Revised -
08/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page