Lifitegrast Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lifitegrast Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616039.html
Lifitegrast Ophthalmic
pronounced as (lif'' i teg' rast)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ophthalmic lifitegrast is used to treat the signs and symptoms of dry eye disease. Lifitegrast is in a class of medications called lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1) antagonist. Lifitegrast works by reducing the swelling in the eye tissues.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic lifitegrast comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eyes. It is usually instilled in each eye twice a day, about 12 hours apart. Instill lifitegrast at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use lifitegrast exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Lifitegrast eye drops come in single-use containers (small bottles to be used for one dose). Use the liquid from the container immediately after opening, and throw away the container with any remaining liquid in it when you are finished. Do not save the liquid left in the container for your next dose.
To instill the eye drops follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Pull off one container of medication from the strip of containers. Put the rest of the containers back into the foil pouch.
Hold the container upright. Be sure that twist off tab is at the top of the container.
Open the container by twisting off the tab at the top of the container.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
Repeat steps 5- 12 to instill in the other eye. There is enough liquid in one container for both eyes.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking lifitegrast,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to lifitegrast, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in lifitegrast ophthalmic solution. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking lifitegrast, call your doctor.
you should know that lifitegrast eye drops should not be instilled while wearing contact lenses. If you wear contact lenses, remove them before instilling lifitegrast eye drops and put them back in 15 minutes later.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lifitegrast may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
blurred vision
itchy or irritated eyes
tearing or eye discharge
headache
runny or stuffy nose
throat irritation
pain or pressure in the face
change in ability to taste food
Lifitegrast may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, closed, and out of reach of children. Keep the containers in the foil pouch until you are ready to use them to protect them from light. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xiidra
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page