Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/trichorhinophalangeal-syndrome-type-i/
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I
Description
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I (TRPS I) is a condition that causes bone and joint malformations; distinctive facial features; and abnormalities of the skin, hair, teeth, sweat glands, and nails. The name of the condition describes some of the areas of the body that are commonly affected: hair (tricho-), nose (rhino-), and fingers and toes (phalangeal).
In people with TRPS I, the ends (epiphyses) of one or more bones in the fingers or toes are abnormally cone-shaped. Additionally, the fingernails and toenails are typically
thin
and abnormally formed. Affected individuals often have
short feet
.
Individuals with TRPS I may have a misalignment of the hip joints (hip dysplasia), which often develops in early adulthood but can occur in infancy or childhood. Children with TRPS I often have an unusually large range of movement (
hypermobility
) in many of their joints. Over time, however, the joints may break down (degenerate), leading to joint pain and a limited range of joint movement.
The characteristic appearance of individuals with TRPS I involves
thick eyebrows
; a
broad nose
with a
rounded tip
; large ears, a
long
,
smooth
area between the nose and the upper lip (philtrum); a
thin upper lip
; and small teeth that are either decreased (oligodontia) or
increased (supernumerary)
in number. Almost all affected individuals have
sparse scalp hair
. Males are particularly affected by hair loss with many being nearly or completely bald soon after puberty. Some children with this condition have loose skin, but the skin becomes tighter over time. Individuals with TRPS I may experience excessive sweating (hyperhidrosis).
Frequency
TRPS I is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown. In the Netherlands, at least 35 people have TRPS I.
Causes
TRPS I is caused by mutations in the
TRPS1
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found within the
cell nucleus
where it interacts with specific regions of DNA to turn off (repress) the activity of certain genes. Research suggests that the TRPS1 protein plays a role in regulating genes that control the growth of bone and other skeletal tissues.
TRPS1
gene mutations lead to the production of an altered TRPS1 protein. The altered protein has a reduced ability to control the activity of genes that regulate the growth of bone and other tissues, leading to abnormal bones in the fingers and toes, joint abnormalities, distinctive facial features, and other signs and symptoms of TRPS I.
A condition similar to TRPS I is caused by the loss of the
TRPS1
gene and its neighboring genes. This condition, called
trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type II
(TRPS II), has many of the same signs and symptoms of TRPS I, as well as multiple benign (noncancerous) bone tumors called osteochondromas and intellectual disability. These additional features are associated with the loss of genes near
TRPS1
.
Learn more about the gene associated with Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type I
TRPS1
Inheritance
TRPS I is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern, which means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder.
In most cases, an affected person inherits the mutation from
one affected parent
. Some cases result from
new mutations in the gene
and occur in people with no history of the disorder in their family.
Other Names for This Condition
Trichorhinophalangeal dysplasia type I
TRP syndrome
TRPS I
TRPS1
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Trichorhinophalangeal dysplasia type I
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome, type i
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
TRICHORHINOPHALANGEAL SYNDROME, TYPE I; TRPS1
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Candamourty R, Venkatachalam S, Karthikeyan B, Babu MR. Trichorhinophalangeal
syndrome type 1: A case report with literature review. J Nat Sci Biol Med. 2012
Jul;3(2):209-11. doi: 10.4103/0976-9668.101936.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Dias C, Isidoro L, Santos M, Santos H, Marques JS. Trichorhinophalangeal
Syndrome Type I: A Patient with Two Novel and Different Mutations in the TRPS1
Gene. Case Rep Genet. 2013;2013:748057. doi: 10.1155/2013/748057. Epub 2013 Apr
17.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Maas SM, Shaw AC, Bikker H, Ludecke HJ, van der Tuin K, Badura-Stronka M,
Belligni E, Biamino E, Bonati MT, Carvalho DR, Cobben J, de Man SA, Den Hollander
NS, Di Donato N, Garavelli L, Gronborg S, Herkert JC, Hoogeboom AJ, Jamsheer A,
Latos-Bielenska A, Maat-Kievit A, Magnani C, Marcelis C, Mathijssen IB, Nielsen
M, Otten E, Ousager LB, Pilch J, Plomp A, Poke G, Poluha A, Posmyk R, Rieubland
C, Silengo M, Simon M, Steichen E, Stumpel C, Szakszon K, Polonkai E, van den
Ende J, van der Steen A, van Essen T, van Haeringen A, van Hagen JM, Verheij JB,
Mannens MM, Hennekam RC. Phenotype and genotype in 103 patients with
tricho-rhino-phalangeal syndrome. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 May;58(5):279-92. doi:
10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.03.002. Epub 2015 Mar 16.
Citation on PubMed
Tuysuz B, Gunes N, Alkaya DU. Trichorhinophalangeal Syndrome. 2017 Apr 20
[updated 2024 Mar 21]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK425926/
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Bone Diseases
Genetic Disorders
Joint Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Hypermobile joints
Joint pain
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page