Ranolazine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ranolazine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a606015.html
Ranolazine
pronounced as (ra noe' la zeen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ranolazine is used alone or with other medications to treat chronic angina (ongoing chest pain or pressure that is felt when the heart does not get enough oxygen). Ranolazine is in a class of medications called anti-anginals. The exact way that ranolazine works is not known at this time.
How should this medicine be used?
Ranolazine comes as an extended-release (long-acting) tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food twice daily. Take ranolazine at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take ranolazine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not break, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of ranolazine and gradually increase your dose.
Do not take ranolazine to treat a sudden attack of angina. Your doctor will tell you what you should do if you experience an attack of angina. Make sure that you understand these directions.
Ranolazine may help control your condition but will not cure it. Continue to take ranolazine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking ranolazine without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking ranolazine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ranolazine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ranolazine extended-release tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with ranolazine. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with ranolazine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting ranolazine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking ranolazine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following herbal product may interact with ranolazine: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking ranolazine. Do not start this medication while taking ranolazine without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease. Your doctor may tell you that you should not take ranolazine.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause fainting or irregular heartbeat) or a fast, slow, or irregular heartbeat. Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an abnormal electrocardiogram (ECG: a test that records the electrical activity of the heart), low levels of potassium in the blood, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking ranolazine, call your doctor.
you should know that ranolazine may make you dizzy and lightheaded. Do not drive a car, operate machinery, or participate in activities requiring mental alertness and coordination until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat grapefruit products while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ranolazine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
constipation
headache
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
difficulty breathing
fainting
Ranolazine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea
vomiting
dizziness
confusion
double vision
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in any part of the body
fainting
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
difficulty speaking
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ranexa
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page