Doxepin (Depression, Anxiety): MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Doxepin (Depression, Anxiety)
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682390.html
Doxepin (Depression, Anxiety)
pronounced as (dox' e pin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
A small number of children, teenagers, and young adults (up to 24 years of age) who took antidepressants ('mood elevators') such as doxepin during clinical studies became suicidal (thinking about harming or killing oneself or planning or trying to do so). Children, teenagers, and young adults who take antidepressants to treat depression or other mental illnesses may be more likely to become suicidal than children, teenagers, and young adults who do not take antidepressants to treat these conditions. However, experts are not sure about how great this risk is and how much it should be considered in deciding whether a child or teenager should take an antidepressant. Children younger than 18 years of age should not normally take doxepin, but in some cases, a doctor may decide that doxepin is the best medication to treat a child's condition.
You should know that your mental health may change in unexpected ways when you take doxepin or other antidepressants even if you are an adult over age 24. You may become suicidal, especially at the beginning of your treatment and any time that your dose is increased or decreased. You, your family, or your caregiver should call your doctor right away if you experience any of the following symptoms: new or worsening depression; thinking about harming or killing yourself, or planning or trying to do so; extreme worry; agitation; panic attacks; difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep; aggressive behavior; irritability; acting without thinking; severe restlessness; and frenzied, abnormal excitement. Be sure that your family or caregiver knows which symptoms may be serious so they can call the doctor if you are unable to seek treatment on your own.
Your healthcare provider will want to see you often while you are taking doxepin, especially at the beginning of your treatment. Be sure to keep all appointments for office visits with your doctor.
The doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with doxepin. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You also can obtain the Medication Guide from the FDA website:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
.
No matter your age, before you take an antidepressant, you, your parent, or your caregiver should talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of treating your condition with an antidepressant or with other treatments. You should also talk about the risks and benefits of not treating your condition. You should know that having depression or another mental illness greatly increases the risk that you will become suicidal. This risk is higher if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had bipolar disorder (mood that changes from depressed to abnormally excited) or mania (frenzied, abnormally excited mood) or has thought about or attempted suicide. Talk to your doctor about your condition, symptoms, and personal and family medical history. You and your doctor will decide what type of treatment is right for you.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Doxepin is used to treat depression and anxiety. Doxepin is in a class of medications called tricyclic antidepressants. It works by increasing the amounts of certain natural substances in the brain that are needed for mental balance.
Doxepin is also available as a tablet to treat insomnia. This monograph only gives information about doxepin for depression or anxiety. If you are using this medication for insomnia, read the monograph entitled doxepin (insomnia).
How should this medicine be used?
Doxepin comes as a capsule, or concentrate (liquid) to take by mouth. It is usually taken one to three times a day and may be taken with or without food. Try to take doxepin at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take doxepin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Doxepin concentrate (oral liquid) comes with a specially marked dropper for measuring the dose. Ask your pharmacist to show you how to use the dropper. Dilute the concentrate in 4 ounces (120 mL) of water; whole or skim milk; or orange, grapefruit, tomato, prune, or pineapple juice just before taking it. Do not mix it with carbonated beverages (soft drinks).
It may take several weeks or longer for you to feel the full effect of doxepin. Continue to take doxepin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking doxepin without talking to your doctor. Your doctor will probably want to decrease your dose gradually.
Other uses for this medicine
Doxepin is also sometimes used to treat chronic hives without a known cause. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking doxepin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to doxepin, amoxapine, loxapine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in doxapine capsules, or concentrate.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor such as isocarboxazid (Marplan), phenelzine (Nardil), selegiline (Eldepryl, Emsam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate).
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking doxepin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects. Your doctor may tell you not to take doxepin if you have taken fluoxetine in the past 5 weeks.
the following nonprescription products may interact with doxepin: cimetidine (Tagamet). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking doxepin. Do not start this medication while taking doxepin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have glaucoma or difficulty urinating. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take doxepin.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, , or have or have ever had asthma, or liver or kidneydisease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking this medication, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking doxepin if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take doxepin because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking doxepin. Alcohol can make the side effects from doxepin worse.
you should know that doxepin may cause angle-closure glaucoma (a condition where the fluid is suddenly blocked and unable to flow out of the eye causing a quick, severe increase in eye pressure which may lead to a loss of vision). Talk to your doctor about having an eye examination before you start taking this medication. If you have nausea, eye pain, changes in vision, such as seeing colored rings around lights, and swelling or redness in or around the eye, call your doctor or get emergency medical treatment right away.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for your next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Doxepin may cause side effects. Call your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
weakness or tiredness
dizziness
increase in pupil size
dry mouth
mouth sores
skin more sensitive to sunlight than usual
flushing
changes in appetite or weight
changes in the way things taste
indigestion
constipation
diarrhea
difficulty urinating
excessive thirst and urination
ringing in your ears
changes in sex drive
swollen testicles
increased breast size
milky discharge from nipples in females
excessive sweating
chills
headache
hair loss
If you experience any of the following symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING or SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS sections, call your doctor immediately:
yellowing of the skin or eyes
fast heartbeat
unusual bleeding or bruising
skin rash, itching, or swelling
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
Doxepin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Store doxepin capsules away from light.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
irregular heart beat
feeling agitated, confused, or drowsy
trouble concentrating
seizures
muscle stiffness
vomiting
increase in pupil size
hallucination (seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist)
fever
cold body temperature
coma (loss of consciousness for a period of time)
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sinequan
®
Capsules
¶
Sinequan
®
Concentrated Solution
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
05/24/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page