Irinotecan Lipid Complex Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Irinotecan Lipid Complex Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616010.html
Irinotecan Lipid Complex Injection
pronounced as (eye'' ri noe tee' kan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Irinotecan lipid complex can cause a severe decrease in the number of white blood cells made by your bone marrow. A decrease in the number of white blood cells in your body may increase the risk that you will develop a serious infection. Your doctor will order laboratory tests regularly during your treatment to check the number of white blood cells in your blood. You may be at greater risk of experiencing this side effect if you are of Asian descent. If you experience any of the following symptoms of infection, call your doctor immediately: fever, chills, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, or other signs of infection.
Irinotecan lipid complex can cause severe and life threatening diarrhea that may lead to dehydration. Tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a bowel obstruction (blockage in your intestine). You may experience the following symptoms within 24 hours after receiving irinotecan lipid complex: diarrhea (sometimes called "early diarrhea"), runny nose, increased saliva, shrinking pupils (black circles in the middle of the eyes), watery eyes, sweating, flushing, slowed heartbeat, or stomach cramps. Tell your doctor right away if you experience any of these symptoms. You may also experience severe diarrhea more than 24 hours after receiving irinotecan lipid complex (sometimes called "late diarrhea"). If you experience any of the following symptoms of late diarrhea, call your doctor immediately: diarrhea, vomiting that stops you from drinking anything, black or bloody stools, lightheadedness, dizziness, or faintness. Your doctor will probably tell you to take loperamide (Imodium AD) to treat symptoms of late diarrhea.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving irinotecan lipid complex.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Irinotecan lipid complex is used in combination with other medications to treat pancreatic cancer that has spread to other parts of the body that has worsened after treatment with other chemotherapy medications. Irinotecan lipid complex is in a class of antineoplastic medications called topoisomerase I inhibitors. It works by stopping the growth of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Irinotecan lipid complex comes as a liquid to be injected intravenously (into a vein) over 90 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. It is usually given once every 2 weeks.
Your doctor may need to delay your treatment and adjust your dose if you experience certain side effects. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with irinotecan lipid complex.
Your doctor may give you medications to prevent nausea and vomiting before you receive each dose of irinotecan lipid complex. Your doctor may also give you or tell you to take other medication(s) to prevent or treat other side effects.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking irinotecan lipid complex,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to irinotecan, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in the irinotecan lipid complex injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking carbamazepine (Carbatrol, Equetro, Tegretol, Teril, Epitol), phenobarbital, phenytoin (Dilantin, Phenytek), rifabutin (Mycobutin), rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane, in Rifamate, Rifater), and rifapentine (Priftin). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take these medications for at least 2 weeks before, and during your treatment with irinotecan lipid complex.tell your doctor if you are taking clarithromycin (Biaxin, in Prevpac), indinavir (Crixivan), itraconazole (Onmel, Sporanox), ketoconazole, lopinavir (in Kaletra), nefazodone, nelfinavir (Viracept), ritonavir (Norvir, in Kaletra, Viekira Pak), saquinavir (Invirase), telaprevir (Incivek), and voriconazole (Vfend). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take these medications for at least one week before, and during your treatment with irinotecan lipid complex.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, you are taking or plan to take while receiving irinotecan lipid complex. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following herbal product may interact with irinotecan lipid complex: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start using irinotecan lipid complex. Do not start this medication while using irinotecan lipid complex without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant, or plan to father a child. You should not become pregnant while you are receiving irinotecan lipid complex and for 1 month after you receive your final treatment. Use a reliable method of birth control during your treatment and for 1 month after your final treatment. If you are a male and your partner can become pregnant, you should use birth control while receiving this medication, and for 4 months after your final treatment. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner become pregnant while receiving irinotecan lipid complex, call your doctor immediately. Irinotecan lipid complex may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breast-feeding. Your doctor may tell you not to breast-feed during your treatment and for 1 month after your last treatment.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Irinotecan lipid complex may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
unusual tiredness or weakness
decreased appetite
nausea
swelling or sores in the mouth
hair loss
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
itching
hives
chest tightness or pain
wheezing
new or worsening cough
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes
difficulty breathing or swallowing
area of red, warm, painful, or swollen skin near the place where the medication was injected
vomiting
decreased urination
swelling in legs and feet
dizziness
shortness of breath
unusual bleeding or bruising
Irinotecan lipid complex may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about irinotecan lipid complex.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Onivyde
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page