GRN-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
GRN-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/grn-related-frontotemporal-lobar-degeneration/
GRN-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration
Description
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration is a progressive brain disorder that can affect behavior, language, and movement. The symptoms of this disorder usually become noticeable in a person's fifties or sixties, and affected people typically survive 7 to 13 years after the appearance of symptoms. However, symptoms can begin as early as a person's thirties or as late as a person's eighties. The features of this condition vary significantly, even among affected members of the same family.
Behavioral changes are the most common early signs of
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration. These include marked changes in personality, judgment, and insight. It may become difficult for affected individuals to interact with others in a socially appropriate manner. Affected people may also become easily distracted and unable to complete tasks. They increasingly require help with personal care and other activities of daily living.
Many people with
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration develop progressive problems with speech and language (aphasia). Affected individuals may have trouble speaking, remembering words and names (dysnomia), and understanding speech. Over time, they may completely lose the ability to communicate (mutism). People with this condition also experience a decline in intellectual function (dementia).
Some people with
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration also develop movement disorders, such as parkinsonism and corticobasal syndrome. The signs and symptoms of these disorders include tremors, muscle stiffness (rigidity), unusually slow movement (bradykinesia), walking problems (gait disturbance), involuntary muscle spasms (myoclonus), uncontrolled muscle tensing (dystonia), and an inability to carry out purposeful movements (apraxia).
Frequency
The prevalence of
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration varies worldwide. It affects an estimated 3 to 15 per 100,000 people aged 45 to 64.
Causes
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration results from mutations (pathogenic variants) in the
GRN
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein called progranulin. Progranulin is active in many different tissues in the body, where it helps control the growth, division, and survival of cells. Progranulin's function in the brain is not well understood, although it appears to play an important role in the survival of nerve cells (
neurons
).
Most mutations in the
GRN
gene prevent any progranulin from being produced from one copy of the gene in each cell. As a result, cells make only half the usual amount of progranulin. It is unclear how a shortage of this protein leads to the features of
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration. However, studies have shown that the disorder is characterized by the buildup of a protein called TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) in certain brain cells. The TDP-43 protein forms clumps (aggregates) that may interfere with cell functions and ultimately lead to cell death. Researchers are working to determine how mutations in the
GRN
gene, and the resulting loss of progranulin, are related to a buildup of TDP-43 in the brain.
The features of
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration result from the gradual loss of neurons in regions near the front of the brain called the
frontal and temporal lobes
. The frontal lobes are involved in reasoning, planning, judgment, and problem-solving, while the temporal lobes help process hearing, speech, memory, and emotion. The death of neurons in these areas causes problems with many critical brain functions. However, it is unclear why the loss of neurons occurs in the frontal and temporal lobes more often than other brain regions in people with
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Learn more about the gene associated with GRN-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration
GRN
Inheritance
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration has a pattern of inheritance known as incomplete autosomal dominance. This means having one copy of the altered gene generally results in milder signs and symptoms than having both copies of the altered gene. People with a mutation in one copy of the
GRN
gene in each cell (heterozygotes) have some functional progranulin protein and develop
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Usually, people with a mutation in both copies of the
GRN
gene in each cell (homozygotes) do not produce any functional progranulin protein. These individuals have the signs and symptoms of another condition called
CLN11 disease
, in which movement and neurological problems begin in adolescence or early adulthood. However, some people with two
GRN
gene mutations that allow the production of some functional progranulin protein have
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
In most cases of
GRN
-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration, an affected person has a parent and other family members with the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Frontotemporal lobar degeneration
FTD-GRN
FTD-PGRN
FTDP-17 GRN
FTDU-17
FTLD
FTLD with TDP-43 pathology
FTLD-TDP
GRN-related frontotemporal dementia
HDDD1
HDDD2
Hereditary dysphasic disinhibition dementia
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Grn-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration with Tdp43 inclusions
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Frontotemporal dementia
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA 2; FTD2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Chen Q, Boeve BF, Senjem M, Tosakulwong N, Lesnick T, Brushaber D, Dheel C,
Fields J, Forsberg L, Gavrilova R, Gearhart D, Graff-Radford J, Graff-Radford N,
Jack CR Jr, Jones D, Knopman D, Kremers WK, Lapid M, Rademakers R, Ramos EM,
Syrjanen J, Boxer AL, Rosen H, Wszolek ZK, Kantarci K. Trajectory of lobar
atrophy in asymptomatic and symptomatic GRN mutation carriers: a longitudinal MRI
study. Neurobiol Aging. 2020 Apr;88:42-50. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2019.12.004. Epub 2019 Dec 12.
Citation on PubMed
Hsiung GYR, Feldman HH. GRN Frontotemporal Dementia. 2007 Sep 7
[updated 2020 Feb 6]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE,
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University
of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK1371/
Citation on PubMed
Le Ber I, Camuzat A, Hannequin D, Pasquier F, Guedj E, Rovelet-Lecrux A,
Hahn-Barma V, van der Zee J, Clot F, Bakchine S, Puel M, Ghanim M, Lacomblez L,
Mikol J, Deramecourt V, Lejeune P, de la Sayette V, Belliard S, Vercelletto M,
Meyrignac C, Van Broeckhoven C, Lambert JC, Verpillat P, Campion D, Habert MO,
Dubois B, Brice A; French research network on FTD/FTD-MND. Phenotype variability
in progranulin mutation carriers: a clinical, neuropsychological, imaging and
genetic study. Brain. 2008 Mar;131(Pt 3):732-46. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn012. Epub
2008 Feb 1.
Citation on PubMed
Rabins PV, Rovner BW, Rummans T, Schneider LS, Tariot PN. Guideline Watch
(October 2014): Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients With Alzheimer's
Disease and Other Dementias. Focus (Am Psychiatr Publ). 2017 Jan;15(1):110-128.
doi: 10.1176/appi.focus.15106. Epub 2017 Jan 11.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Ramos EM, Dokuru DR, Van Berlo V, Wojta K, Wang Q, Huang AY, Deverasetty S,
Qin Y, van Blitterswijk M, Jackson J, Appleby B, Bordelon Y, Brannelly P,
Brushaber DE, Dickerson B, Dickinson S, Domoto-Reilly K, Faber K, Fields J, Fong
J, Foroud T, Forsberg LK, Gavrilova R, Ghoshal N, Goldman J, Graff-Radford J,
Graff-Radford N, Grant I, Grossman M, Heuer HW, Hsiung GR, Huey E, Irwin D,
Kantarci K, Karydas A, Kaufer D, Kerwin D, Knopman D, Kornak J, Kramer JH,
Kremers W, Kukull W, Litvan I, Ljubenkov P, Lungu C, Mackenzie I, Mendez MF,
Miller BL, Onyike C, Pantelyat A, Pearlman R, Petrucelli L, Potter M, Rankin KP,
Rascovsky K, Roberson ED, Rogalski E, Shaw L, Syrjanen J, Tartaglia MC, Tatton N,
Taylor J, Toga A, Trojanowski JQ, Weintraub S, Wong B, Wszolek Z, Rademakers R,
Boeve BF, Rosen HJ, Boxer AL; ARTFL/LEFFTDS consortium; Coppola G. Genetic
screening of a large series of North American sporadic and familial
frontotemporal dementia cases. Alzheimers Dement. 2020 Jan;16(1):118-130. doi:
10.1002/alz.12011.
Citation on PubMed
Staffaroni AM, Bajorek L, Casaletto KB, Cobigo Y, Goh SM, Wolf A, Heuer HW,
Elahi FM, Ljubenkov PA, Dever R, Kornak J, Appleby B, Bove J, Bordelon Y,
Brannelly P, Brushaber D, Caso C, Coppola G, Dheel C, Dickerson BC, Dickinson S,
Dominguez S, Domoto-Reilly K, Faber K, Ferrall J, Fields JA, Fishman A, Fong J,
Foroud T, Forsberg LK, Gavrilova R, Gearhart D, Ghazanfari B, Ghoshal N, Goldman
J, Graff-Radford J, Graff-Radford N, Grant I, Grossman M, Haley D, Hsiung GY,
Huey ED, Irwin DJ, Jones DT, Jones L, Kantarci K, Karydas A, Kaufer DI, Kerwin
DR, Knopman DS, Kraft R, Kremers WK, Kukull WA, Litvan I, Lucente D, Lungu C,
Mackenzie IR, Maldonado M, Manoochehri M, McGinnis SM, McKinley E, Mendez MF,
Miller BL, Multani N, Onyike C, Padmanabhan J, Pantelyat A, Pearlman R,
Petrucelli L, Potter M, Rademakers R, Ramos EM, Rankin KP, Rascovsky K, Roberson
ED, Rogalski E, Sengdy P, Shaw LM, Syrjanen J, Tartaglia MC, Tatton N, Taylor J,
Toga A, Trojanowski JQ, Weintraub S, Wang P, Wong B, Wszolek Z, Boxer AL, Boeve
BF, Kramer JH, Rosen HJ; ARTFL/LEFFTDS consortium. Assessment of executive
function declines in presymptomatic and mildly symptomatic familial
frontotemporal dementia: NIH-EXAMINER as a potential clinical trial endpoint.
Alzheimers Dement. 2020 Jan;16(1):11-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2019.01.012.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Van Deerlin VM, Wood EM, Moore P, Yuan W, Forman MS, Clark CM, Neumann M,
Kwong LK, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM, Grossman M. Clinical, genetic, and pathologic
characteristics of patients with frontotemporal dementia and progranulin
mutations. Arch Neurol. 2007 Aug;64(8):1148-53. doi: 10.1001/archneur.64.8.1148.
Citation on PubMed
van Swieten JC, Heutink P. Mutations in progranulin (GRN) within the spectrum
of clinical and pathological phenotypes of frontotemporal dementia. Lancet
Neurol. 2008 Oct;7(10):965-74. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70194-7. Epub 2008 Sep
2.
Citation on PubMed
Yu CE, Bird TD, Bekris LM, Montine TJ, Leverenz JB, Steinbart E, Galloway NM,
Feldman H, Woltjer R, Miller CA, Wood EM, Grossman M, McCluskey L, Clark CM,
Neumann M, Danek A, Galasko DR, Arnold SE, Chen-Plotkin A, Karydas A, Miller BL,
Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM, Schellenberg GD, Van Deerlin VM. The spectrum of
mutations in progranulin: a collaborative study screening 545 cases of
neurodegeneration. Arch Neurol. 2010 Feb;67(2):161-70. doi:
10.1001/archneurol.2009.328.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Dementia
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Dementia
Genetics
Lobes of the Brain (Image)
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page