Treprostinil Oral Inhalation: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Treprostinil Oral Inhalation
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622039.html
Treprostinil Oral Inhalation
pronounced as (tre pros' ti nil)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Treprostinil oral inhalation is used to treat certain kinds of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH; high blood pressure in the vessels carrying blood to the lungs, causing shortness of breath, dizziness, and tiredness). Treprostinil oral inhalation is also used to treat pulmonary hypertension associated with interstitial lung disease (PH-ILD; high blood pressure in the lungs resulting from a lung disease that involves inflammation and scarring of the lungs). Treprostinil may improve the ability to exercise and slow the worsening of symptoms in patients with PAH and PH-ILD. Treprostinil is in a class of medications called vasodilators and platelet-aggregation inhibitors. It works by relaxing the blood vessels, including those in the lungs, and improving blood flow.
How should this medicine be used?
Treprostinil oral inhalation comes in ampules that contain a solution (liquid) to inhale by mouth using a special nebulizer (a device that turns medication into a mist that can be inhaled) and in cartridges that contain a dry powder to inhale by mouth using a special inhaler. It is usually inhaled four times a day, approximately every 4 hours, during waking hours. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use treprostinil exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor or nurse will show you how to use treprostinil inhalation solution with your nebulizer or treprostinil inhalation powder with the special inhaler. Your doctor will also tell you how many inhalations you will need for each dose. Carefully read the manufacturer's instructions for use that comes with the medication. These instructions describe how to prepare and inhale a dose of treprostinil oral inhalation and how to use the nebulizer or inhaler. Be sure that you understand these directions. Ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions about how to prepare or inhale this medication or how to use or store the nebulizer or inhaler.
Do not swallow treprostinil oral inhalation. If treprostinil solution or powder gets on your skin or in your eyes, rinse your skin or eyes with water right away.
The effects of the medication may not last more than 4 hours. You may need to adjust the timing of your doses to cover your planned activities.
Do not use the nebulizer or inhaler to inhale any other medications.
Treprostinil solution is used with a specific nebulizer. At the end of each day, dispose of any solution remaining in the nebulizer and carefully follow the manufacturer's instructions for cleaning the nebulizer components. Make sure you can get another nebulizer to use right away if your device does not work for any reason. Be sure to ask your healthcare provider what to do if your nebulizer stops working properly.
Treprostinil powder is used with a specific inhaler that can be used for 7 days. After each dose is inhaled, removed the used cartridge from the inhaler and discard the cartridge in a trash can. After 7 days of use, discard the inhaler in a trash can and replace with a new inhaler.
Treprostinil may control the symptoms of PAH and PH-ILD, but does not cure it. Continue to use treprostinil even if you feel well. Do not stop using treprostinil without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop using treprostinil, your symptoms may get worse. Your doctor will probably decrease your dose gradually.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient and a copy of the Instructions for Use for the inhaler device.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using treprostinil inhalation,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to treprostinil (Orenitram, Remodulin, Tyvaso, Tyvaso DPI), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in treprostinil oral inhalation. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while you are using treprostinil inhalation. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had low blood pressure; bleeding problems; asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), or any other lung problems; or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using treprostinil inhalation, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using treprostinil inhalation.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it and call your doctor.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Treprostinil may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
cough
throat irritation or pain
headache
nausea
diarrhea
flushing
muscle, jaw, or bone pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
unusual bleeding or bruising
dizziness or fainting
wheezing, shortness of breath, trouble breathing, or chest tightness
Treprostinil inhalation may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Keep the ampules sealed in the foil pouch until you are ready to use them. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Dispose of unused treprostinil ampules if not used within 7 days after opening the foil pouch. Opened ampules of treprostinil that have been transferred to the delivery device may be stored in the delivery device for up to one day (24 hours); after that time, the solution should be discarded.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
headache
flushing
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
dizziness or fainting
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Tyvaso
®
Tyvaso DPI
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page