Scopolamine Transdermal Patch: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Scopolamine Transdermal Patch
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682509.html
Scopolamine Transdermal Patch
pronounced as (skoe pol' a meen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
On June 18, 2025, the FDA issued a drug safety notification warning about the risk of hyperthermia (increased body temperature) that can occur with scopolamine transdermal. There have been cases of hyperthermia following use of scopolamine transdermal resulting in heat-related complications, hospitalization and death. Most cases occurred in children under the age of 17 or adults older than 60 years who may be more sensitive to body temperature regulation issues.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of hyperthermia before starting treatment with scopolamine transdermal. If you experience increased body temperature or reduce sweating after applying scopolamine transdermal, remove the patch immediately. Symptoms can continue after the patch has been removed. While using scopolamine transdermal, avoid use of external heating devices such as a heating blanket or heating pad.
More information on this FDA safety warning can be found here:
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/fda-adds-warning-about-serious-risk-heat-related-complications-antinausea-patch-transderm-scop?utm_medium=email&utm_source=govdelivery
Why is this medication prescribed?
Scopolamine is used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by motion sickness or medications used during surgery. Scopolamine is in a class of medications called antimuscarinics. It works by blocking the effects of a certain natural substance (acetylcholine) on the central nervous system.
How should this medicine be used?
Scopolamine comes as a patch to be placed on the hairless skin behind your ear. When used to help prevent nausea and vomiting caused by motion sickness, apply the patch at least 4 hours before its effects will be needed and leave in place for up to 3 days. If treatment is needed for longer than 3 days to help prevent nausea and vomiting caused by motion sickness, remove the current patch and apply a new patch behind the other ear. When used to prevent nausea and vomiting from medications used with surgery, apply the patch as directed by your doctor and leave it in place for 24 hours after your surgery.
To apply the patch, follow these instructions:
After washing the area behind the ear, wipe the area with a clean, dry tissue to ensure that the area is dry. Avoid placing on areas of your skin that have cuts, pain, or tenderness.
Remove the patch from its protective pouch. Peel off the clear plastic protective strip and discard it. Don't touch the exposed adhesive layer with your fingers.
Place the adhesive side against the skin.
After you have placed the patch behind your ear, wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Do not cut the patch.
Limit contact with water while swimming and bathing because it may cause the patch may fall off. If the scopolamine patch falls off, discard the patch, and apply a new one on the hairless area behind the other ear.
When the scopolamine patch is no longer needed, remove the patch and fold it in half with the sticky side together and dispose of it. Wash your hands and the area behind your ear thoroughly with soap and water to remove any traces of scopolamine from the area. If a new patch needs to be applied, place a fresh patch on the hairless area behind your other ear.
If you have used scopolamine patches for several days or longer, you may experience withdrawal symptoms that could start 24 hours or more after removing the scopolamine patch such as difficulty with balance, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, stomach cramps, sweating, headache, confusion, muscle weakness, slow heart rate or low blood pressure. Call your doctor right away if your symptoms become severe.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using scopolamine patches,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using scopolamine patches. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have angle-closure glaucoma (a condition where the fluid is suddenly blocked and unable to flow out of the eye causing a quick, severe increase in eye pressure which may lead to a loss of vision). Your doctor will probably tell you not to use scopolamine patch.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had open-angle glaucoma (increase in internal eye pressure that damages the optic nerve); seizures; psychotic disorders (conditions that cause difficulty telling the difference between things or ideas that are real and things or ideas that are not real); stomach or intestinal obstruction; difficulty urinating; preeclampsia (condition during pregnancy with increased blood pressure, high protein levels in the urine, or organ problems); or heart, liver, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using scopolamine patches, call your doctor immediately.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using scopolamine patches.
you should know that scopolamine patch may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how scopolamine patches will affect you. If you participate in water sports, use caution because this medication can have disorienting effects.
talk to your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while using this medication. Alcohol can make the side effects caused by scopolamine patches worse.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of using scopolamine if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually use scopolamine because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed patch as soon as you remember it. Do not apply more than one patch at a time.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Scopolamine patches may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
disorientation
dry mouth
drowsiness
dilated pupils
dizziness
sweating
sore throat
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, remove the patch and call your doctor immediately:
rash
redness
eye pain, redness, or discomfort; blurred vision; seeing halos or colored images
agitation
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist (hallucinating)
confusion
believing things that are not true
not trusting others or feeling that others want to hurt you
difficulty speaking
seizure
painful or difficulty urinating
stomach pain, nausea, or vomiting
Scopolamine patches may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Store patches in an upright position; do not bend or roll them.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose or if someone swallows a scopolamine patch, call your local poison control center at
1-800-222-1222
. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
dry skin
dry mouth
difficulty urinating
fast or irregular heartbeat
tiredness
drowsiness
confusion
agitation
seeing things or hearing voices that do not exist (hallucinating)
seizure
vision changes
coma
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using scopolamine patch.
Remove the scopolamine patch before having a magnetic resonance imaging scan (MRI).
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Transderm Scop
®
Other names
Transdermal scopolamine
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page