Paregoric: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Paregoric
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601090.html
Paregoric
pronounced as (par e gor' ik)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Paregoric is used to relieve diarrhea. It decreases stomach and intestinal movement in the digestive system.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Paregoric comes as a liquid to take by mouth. It usually is taken one to four times a day or immediately after each loose bowel movement. Your prescription may be mixed with water before you take it; the water should turn cloudy white. Do not take more than six doses in 1 day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take paregoric exactly as directed.
Paregoric can be habit-forming. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or for a longer period than your doctor tells you to.
If you have taken this medication for a long time, do not stop taking it suddenly. Your doctor probably will reduce your dose gradually.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking paregoric,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to paregoric or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking paregoric. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease, a history of alcoholism or drug abuse, lung disease, or prostatic hypertrophy.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking paregoric, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking paregoric.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Paregoric may be taken as needed. If your doctor has told you to take paregoric regularly, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Paregoric may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
upset stomach
vomiting
stomach pain
drowsiness
dizziness
If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor immediately:
difficulty breathing
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may want to check your response to paregoric.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Camphorated Tincture of Opium
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page