Linezolid Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Linezolid Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a612002.html
Linezolid Injection
pronounced as (li ne' zoh lid)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Linezolid injection is used to treat infections, including pneumonia, and infections of the skin. Linezolid is in a class of antibacterials called oxazolidinones. It works by stopping the growth of bacteria.
Antibiotics such as linezolid injection will not kill viruses that can cause colds, flu, or other infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Linezolid injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be infused into a vein. It is usually given as an intravenous infusion over 30 minutes to two hours twice a day (every 12 hours) for 10 to 28 days. Children 11 years of age and younger usually receive linezolid injection two to three times a day (every 8 to 12 hours) for 10 to 28 days. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use linezolid injection exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Linezolid infusions are usually given by a doctor or nurse. Your doctor may decide that you or a friend or relative can give the infusions. Your doctor will train the person who will be administering the medication and will test him to be sure he can give the infusion correctly. Be sure that you and the person who will be giving the infusions know the correct dose, how to give the medication, and how often to give the medication. Be sure that you and the person who will be giving the infusion read the manufacturer's information for the patient that comes with this medication before you use it for the first time at home.
Continue to use linezolid injection until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. Do not skip doses or stop using linezolid injection without talking to your doctor. If you stop using linezolid injection too soon or if you skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
Linezolid injection is also sometimes used to treat certain infections of the brain or spinal cord. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using linezolid injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to linezolid, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in linezolid injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients .
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: isocarboxazid (Marplan) phenelzine (Nardil). rasagiline(Azilect), selegiline (Eldepryl, Emsam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate).
some medications should not be taken with linezolid injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with linezolid injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before using linezolid injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using linezolid injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription products may interact with linezolid injection: pseudoephedrine; phenylpropanolamine. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using linezolid injection. Do not start any of these medications while using linezolid injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have a chronic (long-lasting) infection, or if you have or have ever had diabetes, carcinoid syndrome (a condition in which a tumor secretes serotonin), high blood pressure, hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid), immune suppression (problems with your immune system), pheochromocytoma (a tumor of the adrenal gland), seizures, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using linezolid injection, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using linezolid injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Avoid eating or drinking large amounts of foods and beverages containing tyramine while using linezolid injection. Foods and beverages that have been pickled, smoked, or fermented usually contain tyramine. These foods and beverages include alcoholic beverages, especially beer, Chianti, and other red wines; alcohol-free beer; cheeses (especially strong, aged, or processed varieties); sauerkraut; yogurt; raisins; bananas; sour cream; pickled herring; liver (especially chicken liver); dried meats and sausage (including hard salami and pepperoni); canned figs; avocados; soy sauce; turkey; yeast extracts; papaya products (including certain meat tenderizers); fava beans; and broad bean pods.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Infuse the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not infuse a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Linezolid injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
headache
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
change in the ways things taste
rash
itching
dizziness
white patches in the mouth
irritation, burning, or itching of the vagina
change in color of the tongue or teeth
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives, rash, itching, difficulty breathing or swallowing, swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs, hoarseness
blistering or peeling skin
repeated nausea and vomiting; fast breathing; confusion; feeling tired
pain, numbness, or weakness in hands, feet, or other parts of the body
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
unusual bleeding or bruising
changes in color vision, blurred vision, or other changes in vision
seizures
Linezolid injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain blood tests to check your body's response to linezolid injection.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish treatment with linezolid injection, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zyvox
®
Last Revised -
05/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page