Lipoid proteinosis: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Lipoid proteinosis
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/lipoid-proteinosis/
Lipoid proteinosis
Description
Lipoid proteinosis is a condition that results from the formation of numerous small clumps (deposits) of proteins and other molecules in various tissues throughout the body. These tiny clumps appear in the skin,
upper respiratory tract
, the moist tissues that line body openings such as the eyelids and the inside of the mouth (mucous membranes), and other areas.
The first symptom of this condition is usually a hoarse voice, which is due to deposits in the vocal cords. In infancy the hoarseness is expressed as a weak cry. The voice abnormalities persist throughout life and can ultimately cause difficulty speaking or complete loss of speech. Involvement of the throat, tonsils, and lips can result in breathing problems and upper respiratory tract infections. Deposits in the tongue can result in a thick and shortened tongue. They can also thicken the band of tissue that connects the tongue to the bottom of the mouth (
frenulum
), making it difficult to extend the tongue. The
tongue may also have a smooth appearance
due to damage to the taste buds.
A characteristic feature of lipoid proteinosis is the presence of multiple tiny, bead-like bumps lining the
upper and lower eyelids along the lash line
. These bumps are known as moniliform blepharosis. They may cause eyeball irritation or itching but generally do not impair vision.
The skin and mucous membranes are often fragile in children with lipoid proteinosis, leading to bleeding and scabbing following minor trauma. These problems often first appear in infancy in the mouth and on the face and limbs. Over time, these scabs form blisters and scars. Deposits accumulate in the skin, which causes the skin to become thickened and yellowish in color. Skin damage appears more frequently on areas that experience friction, such as the hands, elbows, knees, buttocks, and armpits. Some people with this condition have hair loss (
alopecia
) affecting their scalp, eyelashes, and eyebrows.
Neurologic features are also common in people with lipoid proteinosis. Affected individuals may have recurrent seizures (epilepsy) or behavioral and neurological problems, which can include headaches, aggressive behaviors, paranoia, hallucinations, short-term memory loss, and absence of fear. These features are thought to be associated with the presence of deposits and an accumulation of calcium (calcification) in areas of the brain called
the temporal lobes
. The temporal lobes help process hearing, speech, memory, and emotion. The brain abnormalities and neurological features do not always occur together, so the cause of the neurological features is still unclear.
Deposits can be found in some internal organs, including
the stomach
, a section of the small intestine called
the duodenum
, and the
colon
. The deposits in these tissues often do not cause any symptoms and may disappear over time.
Frequency
Lipoid proteinosis is thought to be a rare condition; fewer than 500 cases have been described in the scientific literature. This condition occurs more frequently in certain areas of the world, including Turkey, Iran, and the Northern Cape province of South Africa.
Causes
Lipoid proteinosis is caused by mutations in the
ECM1
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found in most tissues within the extracellular matrix, which is an intricate lattice that forms in the space between cells and provides structural support. The ECM1 protein can attach (bind) to numerous structural proteins to provide strength to tissues. It is also involved in the growth and maturation (differentiation) of cells, including skin cells called keratinocytes. The ECM1 protein may also regulate the formation of blood vessels (angiogenesis).
ECM1
gene mutations that cause lipoid proteinosis result in the production of a nonfunctional protein or no protein at all. A lack of functional ECM1 protein reduces binding between ECM1 and other proteins, leading to an unstable extracellular matrix. Without adequate support from the extracellular matrix, cells in the skin and other tissues are weakened. However, the cause of the deposits in skin and other tissues is not clear. The unstable extracellular matrix may cause neighboring cells to overproduce proteins and other materials. It is possible that, as these excess substances accumulate in tissues, they create the deposits characteristic of lipoid proteinosis.
Learn more about the gene associated with Lipoid proteinosis
ECM1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Hyalinosis cutis et mucosae
Lipid proteinosis
Lipoglycoproteinosis
Lipoid proteinosis of Urbach and Wiethe
Lipoidosis cutis et mucosae
Lipoidproteinosis
Lipoproteinosis
Urbach-Wiethe disease
Urbach-Wiethe lipoid proteinosis
Urbach-Wiethe syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Lipid proteinosis
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Lipoid proteinosis
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
LIPOID PROTEINOSIS OF URBACH AND WIETHE
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Callizo M, Ibanez-Flores N, Laue J, Cuadrado V, Graell X, Sancho JM. Eyelid
lesions in lipoid proteinosis or Urbach-Wiethe disease: case report and review of
the literature. Orbit. 2011 Oct;30(5):242-4. doi: 10.3109/01676830.2011.579685.
Citation on PubMed
Dogramaci AC, Celik MM, Celik E, Bayarogullari H. Lipoid proteinosis in the
eastern Mediterranean region of Turkey. Indian J Dermatol Venereol Leprol. 2012
May-Jun;78(3):318-22. doi: 10.4103/0378-6323.95447.
Citation on PubMed
Kabre V, Rani S, Pai KM, Kamra S. Lipoid proteinosis: A review with two case
reports. Contemp Clin Dent. 2015 Apr-Jun;6(2):233-6. doi:
10.4103/0976-237X.156053.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Mcgrath JA. Lipoid proteinosis. Handb Clin Neurol. 2015;132:317-22. doi:
10.1016/B978-0-444-62702-5.00023-8.
Citation on PubMed
Mondejar R, Garcia-Moreno JM, Rubio R, Solano F, Delgado M, Garcia-Bravo B,
Rios-Martin JJ, Martinez-Mir A, Lucas M. Clinical and molecular study of the
extracellular matrix protein 1 gene in a spanish family with lipoid proteinosis.
J Clin Neurol. 2014 Jan;10(1):64-8. doi: 10.3988/jcn.2014.10.1.64. Epub 2014 Jan
6.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Nasir M, Latif A, Ajmal M, Qamar R, Naeem M, Hameed A. Molecular analysis of
lipoid proteinosis: identification of a novel nonsense mutation in the ECM1 gene
in a Pakistani family. Diagn Pathol. 2011 Jul 26;6:69. doi:
10.1186/1746-1596-6-69.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Nasir M, Rahman SB, Sieber CM, Mir A, Latif A, Ahmad N, Malik SA, Hameed A.
Identification of recurrent c.742G>T nonsense mutation in ECM1 in Pakistani
families suffering from lipoid proteinosis. Mol Biol Rep. 2014;41(4):2085-92.
doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3057-1. Epub 2014 Jan 12.
Citation on PubMed
Vahidnezhad H, Youssefian L, Uitto J. Lipoid Proteinosis. 2016 Jan 21 [updated
2021 Jul 22]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A,
editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of
Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK338540/
Citation on PubMed
Youssefian L, Vahidnezhad H, Daneshpazhooh M, Abdollahzadeh S, Talari H,
Khoshnevisan A, Chams-Davatchi C, Mobasher R, Li Q, Uitto J, Akhondzadeh S,
Tabrizi M. Lipoid proteinosis: phenotypic heterogeneity in Iranian families with
c.507delT mutation in ECM1. Exp Dermatol. 2015 Mar;24(3):220-2. doi:
10.1111/exd.12620.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Epilepsy
Genetic Disorders
Skin Conditions
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Hoarseness
Tongue problems
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page