Enfuvirtide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Enfuvirtide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603023.html
Enfuvirtide Injection
pronounced as (en fyoo' vir tide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Notice:
Enfuviritide injection has been discontinued in the US. Because this drug is no longer available in the US market, the material in this monograph is no longer updated If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers’ labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Enfuvirtide injection is used along with other medications to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in adults and children who weigh at least 24 pounds (11 kg) who have been treated with several other HIV medications in the past and whose HIV could not be successfully be treated with other medications, including their current therapy. Enfuvirtide is in a class of medications called HIV entry and fusion inhibitors. It works by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood. Although enfuvirtide does not cure HIV, it may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses such as serious infections or cancer. Taking these medications along with practicing safer sex and making other life-style changes may decrease the risk of transmitting (spreading) the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
Enfuvirtide injection comes as a powder to be mixed with sterile water and injected subcutaneously (under the skin). It is usually injected twice a day. To help you remember to inject enfuvirtide, inject it at about the same times each day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use enfuvirtide injection exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Enfuvirtide injection controls HIV but does not cure it. Continue to use enfuvirtide injection even if you feel well. Do not stop using enfuvirtide injection without talking to your doctor. If you miss doses or stop using enfuvirtide injection, your condition may become more difficult to treat.
Your doctor or nurse will show you or a caregiver how to mix and inject a dose of enfuvirtide injection at home. Before you use enfuvirtide injection for the first time, you and the person who will be giving the injections should read the manufacturer's information for the patient that comes with it. These instructions describe how to mix and inject a dose of enfuvirtide. Be sure that you understand these directions. Ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions about when you should use the medication, where on your body you should inject the medication, how to give the injection, or what type of syringe and needle to use.
You can inject enfuvirtide anywhere in the front of your thighs or in your lower stomach except for the 2-inch (5-centimeter) area around the navel (belly button). If someone else is giving you the injection, it can be injected into the outer area of your upper arms. Do not inject enfuvirtide in any area directly under a belt or waistband; near the elbow, knee, groin, the lower or inner buttocks; or directly over a blood vessel. To reduce the chances of soreness, choose a different area for each injection. Keep track of the areas where you inject enfuvirtide, and do not give an injection into the same area two times in a row. Use your fingertips to check your chosen area for hard bumps under the skin. Do not inject enfuvirtide into an area of skin that has a tattoo, scar, bruise, mole, a burn site, or has had a reaction to a previous injection of enfuvirtide.
Never reuse needles, syringes, vials of enfuvirtide, or vials of sterile water. Dispose of used needles and syringes in a puncture-resistant container. Do not put them in a trash can. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container. Ask your doctor how to dispose of used alcohol pads and vials.
Before preparing an enfuvirtide dose, wash your hands with soap and water. After you wash your hands, do not touch anything except the medication, supplies, and the area where you will inject the medication.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's injection information for the patient. Carefully read the manufacturer's instructions to learn how to prepare and inject your dose. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have questions about how to inject enfuvirtide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using enfuvirtide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to enfuvirtide, mannitol, any other medications, or any ingredient in enfuvirtide injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you smoke, if you use or have ever used intravenous (injected into the vein) street drugs, and if you have or have ever had hemophilia or any other blood-clotting or bleeding condition, a low CD4 count (low number of a certain type of infection-fighting cell in your blood), or lung disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using enfuvirtide, call your doctor. You should not breast-feed if you are infected with HIV or if you are using enfuvirtide.
Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections. If you have new or worsening symptoms after starting treatment with enfuvirtide injection, be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Inject the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not inject a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Enfuvirtide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
itching, swelling, pain, tingling, discomfort, tenderness, redness, bruising, hardened area of skin, or bumps at the injection site
red bumps or pimples around hair follicles
tiredness
muscle pain
nausea
decreased appetite
weight loss
diarrhea
arm and leg pain
stomach pain
flu-like symptoms
nasal congestion
cold sores
dry mouth
painful, itchy, red, or teary eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical help:
worsening pain, oozing, swelling, warmth, or redness in a place you injected enfuvirtide
rash; hives; itching; difficulty breathing or swallowing; nausea; vomiting; or swelling of your face, eyes, lips or mouth
fever
chills
cough with fever, fast breathing, or shortness of breath
decreased urination; foamy, pink, or brown colored urine; swelling in hands, face, feet or stomach
pain, burning, numbness, or tingling in feet or legs
ongoing pain that begins in the upper left or middle of the stomach but may spread to the back with or without vomiting
pale or fatty stools
yellowing of skin or eyes, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, itching, loss of appetite, dark (tea-colored) urine, extreme tiredness, nausea, or vomiting
Enfuvirtide may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication and the sterile water that comes with it in the containers they came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store them at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). If they cannot be stored at room temperature, put them in the refrigerator. If you mix the medication and sterile water in advance, store the mixture in the vial in the refrigerator for up to 24 hours. Never store mixed medication in the syringe.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to enfuvirtide injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using enfuvirtide injection.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Fuzeon
®
Other names
T-20
Pentafuside
Last Revised -
04/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page