Ganciclovir Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ganciclovir Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620012.html
Ganciclovir Ophthalmic
pronounced as (gan sye' kloe veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ganciclovir ophthalmic is used to treat herpetic keratitis (dendritic ulcers; eye ulcers caused by a herpes simplex virus infection). Ganciclovir is in a class of medications called antivirals. It works by stopping the spread of the herpes virus in the eye.
How should this medicine be used?
Ganciclovir ophthalmic comes as a gel to apply to the eyes. It is usually applied as one drop to the affected eye(s) five times a day (about every 3 hours while awake) until the eye(s) heal. Then apply one drop 3 times a day into the affected eye(s) for another 7 days. Use ganciclovir ophthalmic at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use ganciclovir ophthalmic exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You should expect your symptoms to improve during your treatment. Call your doctor if your symptoms get worse, do not go away, or if you develop other problems with your eyes during your treatment.
To apply the eye gel, follow these instructions:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Avoid touching the tip of the tube against your eye or anything else. The gel must be kept clean.
Tilt your head back slightly and pull down your lower eyelid to create a small pocket.
Holding the tube above the eye with the tip down without touching it.
Place a drop of the gel into the pocket made by the lower lid and the eye by squeezing the bottom of the tube. Look up and away from the tube as you squeeze out a drop of gel.
Close your eye after the drop goes into your eye Gently press your finger on the inside corner of the eye, near your nose, for 1 minute to keep the gel from going into your tear duct.
Wipe off any excess gel from your eyelids and lashes with a clean tissue. Wash your hands again.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before applying ganciclovir ophthalmic,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ganciclovir, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ganciclovir gel. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using ganciclovir ophthalmic, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you wear contact lenses. Your doctor will tell you not to wear contact lenses during your treatment with ganciclovir or if you have any signs of infection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra gel to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ganciclovir ophthalmic may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
red, swelling, irritated, itchy, or teary eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
new or worsening eye sensitivity to light, blurred vision, or eye pain
Ganciclovir ophthalmic may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not allow the medication to freeze.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
If someone swallows ganciclovir ophthalmic, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription. If you still have symptoms of an eye infection after you finish the ganciclovir eye gel, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zirgan
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page