Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620034.html
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy Injection
pronounced as (sak" i tooz' ue mab goe" vi tee' kan)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection can cause severe decrease in the number of white blood cells in your blood. This can increase the chance that you will develop a serious infection that may cause death. Your doctor will order tests regularly during your treatment to check the number of white blood cells in your blood. Your doctor may give you an additional medication to increase your white blood cell count before you start treatment and during treatment if your white blood cell count is too low. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: fever, chills, sore throat, shortness of breath, ongoing cough, congestion, burning or pain when you urinate, or other signs of infection.
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection can cause severe diarrhea. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following: loose stools; diarrhea; black or bloody stools; signs of dehydration such as lightheadedness, dizziness, or faintness; or if you are unable to take fluids by mouth due to nausea or vomiting. Talk to your doctor about what you should do if you develop diarrhea or if it is not controlled within 24 hours after treatment with medications for diarrhea.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to sacituzumab govitecan-hziy.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving sacituzumab govitecan-hziy.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection is used to treat certain types of breast cancer. Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy is in a class of medications called chemotherapy. It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected intravenously (into a vein) over 1 to 3 hours by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or medical facility. It is given on days 1 and 8 of a 21-day cycle. The cycle may be repeated as recommended by your doctor. The length of your treatment depends on how well your body responds to the medication and any side effects that you experience.
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection can cause serious reactions, which can occur within 24 hours of receiving a dose. Your doctor will monitor you closely during and for at least 30 minutes after you receive a dose. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of the following: swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat; fever; dizziness; flushing; chills; rash; hives; itching; wheezing; or difficulty breathing.
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy may cause nausea and vomiting during treatment with the medication. Your doctor may give you other medications to help prevent nausea and vomiting.
Your doctor may slow down your infusion, decrease your dose, delay or stop your treatment, or treat you with additional medications depending on your response to the medication and any side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease or been told you have a genetic disorder.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan to father a child. You or your partner should not become pregnant while you are receiving sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection. If you can become pregnant, you must take a pregnancy test before starting treatment and use birth control during your treatment and for 6 months after your final dose. If your partner can become pregnant, you and your partner should use birth control during your treatment and for 3 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that will work for you. If you or your partner becomes pregnant while receiving sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection, call your doctor. Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are receiving sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection and for 1 month after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive sacituzumab govitecan-hziy, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
mouth sores
stomach pain
heartburn
tiredness
loss of appetite
taste changes
hair loss
dry skin
headache
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
pain in arms, legs, back, or joints
swelling of the hands, ankles, or feet
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING and HOW sections, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
easy bruising or bleeding; bleeding from gums or nose; or blood in urine or stool
pale skin or unusual tiredness or weakness
stomach cramps or increased salivation
Sacituzumab govitecan-hziy may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
fever, chills, cough, or other signs of infection
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about sacituzumab govitecan-hziy injection. Your doctor may order certain lab tests before you begin your treatment to see if you may be more likely to have an increased risk for side effects based on your heredity or genetic make-up.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Trodelvy
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page