Norethindrone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Norethindrone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604034.html
Norethindrone
pronounced as (nor eth in' drone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Norethindrone is used to treat endometriosis (a condition in which the type of tissue that lines the uterus [womb] grows in other areas of the body and causes pain, heavy or irregular menstruation [periods], and other symptoms). Norethindrone is also used to treat abnormal periods or bleeding and to bring on a normal menstrual cycle in women who menstruated normally in the past but have not menstruated for at least 3 months and who are not pregnant or experiencing menopause (change of life; the end of monthly menstrual periods). Norethindrone is in a class of medications called progestins. It works by stopping the lining of the uterus from growing and by causing the uterus to produce certain hormones.
Norethindrone is also used to prevent pregnancy. Norethindrone is sold under different brand names and is taken in smaller amounts when it used to prevent pregnancy. This monograph does not include information on the use of norethindrone to prevent pregnancy. If you are taking norethindrone to prevent pregnancy, read the monograph entitled
Progestin-Only (norethindrone) Oral Contraceptives.
How should this medicine be used?
Norethindrone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Norethindrone is taken on different schedules that depend on the condition that is being treated and on how well norethindrone works to treat the conditions. When norethindrone is used to treat endometriosis, it is usually taken once a day for 6 to 9 months or until breakthrough bleeding becomes bothersome. When norethindrone is used to bring on a normal cycle in women who have stopped menstruating, it is usually taken once a day for 5 to 10 days during the second half of the planned menstrual cycle. To help you remember to take norethindrone, take it at around the same time of day every day that you are scheduled to take it. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take norethindrone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you are taking norethindrone for endometriosis, your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of norethindrone and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 2 weeks.
Norethindrone may control your condition but will not cure it. Continue to take norethindrone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking norethindrone without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking norethindrone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to norethindrone, oral contraceptives ('birth control pills'), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in norethindrone tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking norethindrone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
the following herbal product may interact with norethindrone: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking norethindrone. Do not start any of these medications while taking norethindrone without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a heart attack; a stroke or mini-stroke; breast cancer; unexplained abnormal vaginal bleeding; blood clots in your legs, lungs, or eyes; or liver disease or any other type of liver problem. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take norethindrone.
tell your doctor if you have or ever had coronary artery disease (clogged blood vessels leading to the heart), chest pain, thrombophilia (a condition in which the blood clots more easily), seizures, migraine headaches, depression, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, diabetes, lupus (a condition in which the body attacks its own tissues causing damage and swelling), or heart or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking norethindrone, call your doctor immediately. Norethindrone should never be used to test for pregnancy.
tell your doctor if you smoke or use tobacco products. Smoking may increase the risk that you will develop serious side effects of norethindrone.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Norethindrone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
irregular vaginal bleeding or spotting
changes in menstrual flow
enlarged or tender breasts
nausea
vomiting
bloating
weight changes
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
acne
brown patches on the face
hair loss
growth of hair on face
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
loss of vision
blurred vision
double vision
bulging eyes
migraine headache
pain, warmth, or heaviness in the back of the lower leg
shortness of breath
coughing up blood
sudden sharp or crushing chest pain
heaviness in chest
slow or difficult speech
dizziness or faintness
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
swelling of the arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
yellowing of the skin or eyes
depression
mood swings
missed periods
sudden, severe pain in the abdomen (area between the chest and waist)
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
Norethindrone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to norethindrone.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking norethindrone.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aygestin
®
Norlutate
®
¶
Norlutin
®
¶
Other names
Norethisterone acetate
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
03/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page