Rifaximin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rifaximin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a604027.html
Rifaximin
pronounced as (ri fax' I men)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rifaximin 200-mg tablets are used to treat traveler's diarrhea caused by certain bacteria in adults and children at least 12 years of age. Rifaximin 550-mg tablets are used to prevent episodes of hepatic encephalopathy (changes in thinking, behavior, and personality caused by a build-up of toxins in the brain in people who have liver disease) in adults who have liver disease and to treat irritable bowel syndrome (with diarrhea) in adults. Rifaximin is in a class of medications called antibiotics. Rifaximin treats traveler's diarrhea and irritable bowel syndrome by stopping the growth of the bacteria that cause diarrhea. Rifaximin treats hepatic encephalopathy by stopping the growth of bacteria that produce toxins and that may worsen liver disease. Rifaximin will not work to treat traveler's diarrhea that is bloody or occurs with fever.
Antibiotics such as rifaximin will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Rifaximin comes as a tablet to take by mouth with or without food. When rifaximin is used to treat traveler's diarrhea, it is usually taken three times a day for 3 days. When rifaximin is used to prevent episodes of hepatic encephalopathy, it is usually taken twice a day. When rifaximin is used to treat irritable bowel syndrome, it is usually taken three times a day for 14 days. To help you remember to take rifaximin, take it around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take rifaximin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you are taking rifaximin to treat traveler's diarrhea, your symptoms should improve within 24 to 48 hours after you start taking the medication. If your symptoms do not go away or they get worse, or if you develop a fever or bloody diarrhea, call your doctor.
If you are taking rifamaxin to treat irritable bowel syndrome and your symptoms return after you have finished your treatment, call your doctor.
Take rifaximin as directed, even if you feel better. If you are taking rifaximin to treat traveler's diarrhea or irritable bowel syndrome and you stop taking it too soon or if you skip doses, your infection may not be completely cured and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics. If you are taking rifaximin to prevent hepatic encephalopathy, do not stop taking it without talking to your doctor as you may experience symptoms of encephalopathy.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking rifaximin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rifaximin, rifabutin (Mycobutin), rifampin (Rifadin, Rifamate, Rifater, Rimactane), rifapentine (Priftin), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in rifaximin capsules. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking rifaximin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking rifaximin, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rifaximin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
stomach pain
dizziness
excessive tiredness
headache
muscle tightening
joint pain
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
watery or bloody diarrhea that may occur along with stomach cramps and fever during your treatment or for 2 months afterward
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
hoarseness
Rifaximin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist if you have any questions about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Xifaxan
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page