Cisapride: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cisapride
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a694006.html
Cisapride
pronounced as (sis' a pride)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Cisapride is only available in the United States to special patients who are signed up by their doctors. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about whether you should be taking cisapride.
Cisapride may cause serious irregular heart beats, which can lead to death. Tell your doctor if you have a family history of heart problems and if you have or have ever had irregular heart beats, heart disease, severe dehydration, vomiting, eating disorders, or kidney or lung failure.
Tell your doctor about all the prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking. Do not take cisapride if you are taking bepridil (Vascor); chlorpromazine (Thorazine); clarithromycin (Biaxin); erythromycin (E.E.S., E-Mycin, Ery-Tab); fluconazole (Diflucan); fluphenazine (Prolixin); itraconazole (Sporanox); ketoconazole (Nizoral); medications for depression such as amitriptyline (Elavil), amoxapine (Asendin), clomipramine (Anafranil), desipramine (Norpramin), doxepin (Adapin, Sinequan), imipramine (Tofranil), maprotiline (Ludiomil), nefazodone (Serzone), nortriptyline (Pamelor), protriptyline (Vivactil), and trimipramine (Surmontil); medications for irregular heart beats such as amiodarone (Cordarone), disopyramide (Norpace), quinidine (Quinidex), procainamide (Procanbid, Pronestyl), and sotalol (Betapace); mesoridazine (Serentil); perphenazine (Trilafon); prochlorperazine (Compazine); promethazine (Phenergan); protease inhibitors such as indinavir (Crixivan) and ritonavir (Norvir); sertindole (Serlect); sparfloxacin (Zagam); thioridazine (Mellaril); thiothixene (Navane); trifluoperazine (Stelazine); or troleandomycin (Tao). Do not drink grapefruit juice while taking cisapride.
Do not take more of cisapride or take it more often than prescibed by your doctor. Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to cisapride.
If you experience either of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: fainting or irregular or fast heartbeats.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cisapride is used to treat symptoms of nighttime heartburn in people who have not responded to other treatments.
How should this medicine be used?
Cisapride comes as a tablet and liquid to take by mouth. Cisapride usually is taken four times a day, 15 minutes before meals and at bedtime. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take cisapride exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication should not be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking cisapride,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cisapride or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking cisapride. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had intestinal disorders or bleeding ulcers.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking cisapride, call your doctor.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cisapride may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
upset stomach
stomach discomfort
headache
stuffy nose
constipation
coughing
If you experience any of the following symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section call your doctor immediately:
vision changes
chest pain
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to cisapride.
Do not let anyone else take your medicine. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Propulsid
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page