Triptorelin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Triptorelin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611047.html
Triptorelin Injection
pronounced as (trip'' toe rel' in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Triptorelin injection (Trelstar) is used to treat the symptoms associated with advanced prostate cancer. Triptorelin injection (Triptodur) is used to treat central precocious puberty (CPP; a condition causing children to enter puberty too soon, resulting in faster than normal bone growth and development of sexual characteristics) in children 2 years and older. Triptorelin injection is in a class of medications called gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) agonists. It works by decreasing the amount of certain hormones in the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Triptorelin injection (Trelstar) comes as an extended-release (long-acting) suspension to be injected into the muscle of either buttock by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or clinic. Triptorelin injection (Trelstar) also comes as an extended-release suspension to be injected into the muscle of the buttock or thigh by a doctor or nurse in a medical office or clinic. When used for prostate cancer, an injection of 3.75 mg of triptorelin (Trelstar) is usually given every 4 weeks, an injection of 11.25 mg of triptorelin (Trelstar) is usually given every 12 weeks, or an injection of 22.5 mg of triptorelin (Trelstar) is usually given every 24 weeks. When used in children with central precocious puberty, an injection of 22.5 mg of triptorelin (Triptodur) is usually given every 24 weeks.
Triptorelin may cause an increase in certain hormones in the first few weeks after injection. Your doctor will monitor you carefully for any new or worsening symptoms during this time.
Triptorelin may cause metabolic changes that lead to long-term conditions like diabetes, hyperlipidemia and, non-alcoholic liver disease. Your doctor will monitor your symptoms and labs during treatment for the development of any of these conditions. Discuss with your doctor any concerns you have about the long-term effects of using triptorelin.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving triptorelin injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to triptorelin, goserelin (Zoladex), histrelin (Supprelin LA, Vantas), leuprolide (Eligard, Lupron), nafarelin (Synarel), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in triptorelin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has ever had long QT syndrome (condition that increases the risk of developing an irregular heartbeat that may cause fainting or sudden death). Also tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes; cancer that has spread to the spine (backbone),; urinary obstruction (blockage that causes difficulty urinating), a low level of potassium, calcium, or magnesium in your blood, a heart attack; heart failure; a mental illness; a seizure or epilepsy; a stroke, mini-stroke, or other brain problems; a brain tumor; or heart, kidney, or liver disease.
you should know that triptorelin is not to be used in women who are pregnant or who can become pregnant. Tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you think you have become pregnant while using triptorelin injection, call your doctor immediately. Triptorelin injection can harm the fetus.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Triptorelin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
heartburn
constipation
hot flashes (a sudden wave of mild or intense body heat), sweating, or clamminess
decreased sexual ability or desire
mood changes such as crying, irritability, impatience, anger, and aggression
leg or joint pain
breast pain
depression
pain, itching, swelling, or redness at the place where injection was given
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
cough
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, eyes, mouth, throat, tongue, or lips
hoarseness
seizures
chest pain
pain in the arms, back, neck, or jaw
slow or difficult speech
dizziness or fainting
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
not able to move legs
bone pain
painful or difficult urination
blood in urine
frequent urination
extreme thirst
weakness
blurred vision
dry mouth
nausea
vomiting
breath that smells fruity
decreased consciousness
In children receiving triptorelin injection (Triptodur) for central precocious puberty, new or worsening symptoms of sexual development may occur during the first few weeks of treatment. In girls, the onset of menstruation or spotting (light vaginal bleeding) may occur during the first two months of this treatment. If bleeding continues beyond the second month, call your doctor.
Triptorelin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests and take certain body measurements to check your body's response to triptorelin injection. Your blood sugar and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) should be checked regularly.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are receiving triptorelin injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about triptorelin injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Trelstar
®
Triptodur
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page