Tezacaftor and Ivacaftor: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Tezacaftor and Ivacaftor
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618022.html
Tezacaftor and Ivacaftor
pronounced as (tez" a kaf' tor) and (eye'' va kaf' tor)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of tezacaftor and ivacaftor is used along with ivacaftor to treat certain types of cystic fibrosis (an inborn disease that causes problems with breathing, digestion, and reproduction) in adults and children 6 years of age and older. Tezacaftor and ivacaftor should be used only in people with a certain genetic make-up. Your doctor may order a blood test to help decide if this medication is right for you. Tezacaftor is in a class of medications called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) correctors. Ivacaftor is in a class of medications called cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) potentiators. Both of these medications work by improving the function of a protein in the body to decrease the build-up of thick mucus in the lungs and improve other cystic fibrosis symptoms.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of tezacaftor and ivacaftor and ivacaftor come as tablets to take by mouth. This medication comes in a package with 4 weeks of medication. Each daily dose has different types of tablets: one tablet is the combination of tezacaftor and ivacaftor and the other tablet is ivacaftor. Take tezacaftor and ivacaftor (1 yellow or white tablet) every morning with a fatty food and ivacaftor (1 blue tablet) every evening with a fatty food, 12 hours apart. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take these medications exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Take the combination of tezacaftor and ivacaftor and ivacaftor with fatty foods such as eggs, butter, nuts, peanut butter, cheese pizza, and whole-milk dairy products (such as whole milk, cheese, and yogurt). Talk to your doctor about other fatty foods to eat with these medications.
The combination of tezacaftor and ivacaftor along with ivacaftor works to control cystic fibrosis, but they do not cure it. Continue to take these medications even if you feel well. Do not stop taking these medications without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking the tezacaftor and ivacaftor,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to tezacaftor, ivacaftor, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in tezacaftor and ivacaftor and ivacaftor tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with tezacaftor and ivacaftor tablets: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking tezacaftor and ivacaftor tablets. Do not start any of these medications while taking the combination of tezacaftor and ivacaftor along with ivacaftor without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking the combination of tezacaftor and ivacaftor along with ivacaftor, call your doctor.
you should know that these medications may make you dizzy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how these medications affect you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not eat grapefruit or drink grapefruit juice while taking these medications.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you remember the missed dose of either tablet within 6 hours of the time you were scheduled to take it, take the missed dose right away with a fat-containing food. However, if more than 6 hours have passed since the scheduled time to take either tablet, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Tezacaftor and ivacaftor may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
nasal congestion
dizziness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking tezacaftor and ivacaftor and call your doctor immediately:
yellowing of the skin or eyes
loss of appetite
nausea
vomiting
pale stools
stomach pain
dark urine
rash; hives; itching; swelling of the face, eyes, lips, tongue, mouth, or throat; wheezing; difficulty breathing or swallowing; or lightheadedness
Tezacaftor and ivacaftor may cause cataracts (clouding of the lens of the eye that may cause vision problems) in children and teenagers. Children and teenagers taking tezacaftor and ivacaftor should see an eye doctor before and during their treatment. Talk to your child's doctor about the risks of giving tezacaftor and ivacaftor to your child.
Tezacaftor and ivacaftor may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order an eye exam (for children and teenagers) and certain lab tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to tezacaftor and ivacaftor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Symdeko
®
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page