Flurandrenolide Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Flurandrenolide Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601055.html
Flurandrenolide Topical
pronounced as (flure an dren' oh lide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Flurandrenolide topical is used to treat the itching, redness, dryness, crusting, scaling, inflammation, and discomfort of various skin conditions, including psoriasis (a skin disease in which red, scaly patches form on some areas of the body and eczema (a skin disease that causes the skin to be dry and itchy and to sometimes develop red, scaly rashes). Flurandrenolide is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by activating natural substances in the skin to reduce swelling, redness, and itching.
How should this medicine be used?
Flurandrenolide comes in ointment, cream, and lotion in various strengths for use on the skin. It also comes in tape to be applied to the skin as a dressing. Flurandrenolide ointment, cream, and lotion are usually applied two or three times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use flurandrenolide exactly as directed. Do not apply more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor. Do not apply it to other areas of your body or use it to treat other skin conditions unless directed to do so by your doctor.
Your skin condition should improve during the first 2 weeks of your treatment. Call your doctor if your symptoms do not improve during this time.
To use flurandrenolide topical, apply a small amount of ointment, cream, or lotion with a thin film and rub it in gently.
This medication is only for use on the skin. Do not let flurandrenolide topical get into your eyes or mouth and do not swallow it. Avoid use on the face, in the genital and rectal areas, and in skin creases and armpits unless directed by your doctor.
If you are using flurandrenolide on a child's diaper area, do not use tight-fitting diapers or plastic pants. Such use may increase side effects.
Do not apply other skin preparations or products on the treated area without talking with your doctor.
Do not wrap or bandage the treated area unless your doctor tells you that you should. Such use may increase side effects.
If your doctor directs you to use flurandrenolide tape, follow these steps and the special instructions that accompany this medication:
Gently clean the affected area with germicidal soap (ask your pharmacist to recommend a soap) and water, removing any scales and crusts. Dry your skin thoroughly.
Shave or clip the hair in the area to allow the tape to adhere well to your skin and for comfortable removal.
Cut (do not tear) a piece of tape slightly larger than the treatment area and round off the corners. Remove the white paper from the tape, exposing the medicated surface. Do not let the tape stick to itself. Keep your skin smooth, and press the tape in place.
Replace the tape as directed on your prescription label. Remove the old tape, wash your skin, and allow the area to dry for 1 hour before applying fresh tape.
If the ends of the tape loosen before it is time to replace it, trim off the ends and replace them with new tape.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using flurandrenolide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to flurandrenolide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in flurandrenolide topical products. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while using flurandrenolide topical. . Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes or Cushing's syndrome (an abnormal condition that is caused by excess hormones [corticosteroids]).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using flurandrenolide, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Flurandrenolide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, itching, drying or cracking of the skin
acne
tiny red bumps or rash around the mouth
small white or red bumps on the skin
change in skin color
unwanted hair growth
bruising or shiny skin
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
severe skin rash
redness, swelling, oozing pus, or other signs of skin infection in the place where you applied flurandrenolide
irritation in the place where you applied flurandrenolide tape
skin sores
Children who use flurandrenolide topical may have an increased risk of side effects including slowed growth and delayed weight gain. Talk to your child's doctor about the risks of applying this medication to your child's skin.
Flurandrenolide topical may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze it.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows flurandrenolide topical, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor .
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cordran
®
Cordran
®
SP
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page