Fluphenazine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fluphenazine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682172.html
Fluphenazine
pronounced as (floo fen' a zeen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Studies have shown that older adults with dementia (a brain disorder that affects the ability to remember, think clearly, communicate, and perform daily activities and that may cause changes in mood and personality) who take antipsychotics (medications for mental illness) such as fluphenazine have an increased risk of death during treatment.
Fluphenazine is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of behavior problems in older adults with dementia. Talk to the doctor who prescribed this medication if you, a family member, or someone you care for has dementia and is taking fluphenazine. For more information visit the FDA website:
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs
Why is this medication prescribed?
Fluphenazine is an antipsychotic medication used to treat schizophrenia and psychotic symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions, and hostility.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Fluphenazine comes as a tablet or oral liquid (elixir and concentrate) to take by mouth. It is usually taken two or three times a day and may be taken with or without food. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take fluphenazine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Fluphenazine oral liquid comes with a specially marked dropper for measuring the dose. Ask your pharmacist to show you how to use the dropper. Do not allow the liquid to touch your skin or clothing; it can cause skin irritation. Dilute the concentrate in water, Seven-Up, carbonated orange beverage, milk, or V-8, pineapple, apricot, prune, orange, tomato, or grapefruit juice just before taking it. Do not use beverages containing caffeine (coffee, tea, and cola) or apple juice.
Continue to take fluphenazine even if you feel well. Do not stop taking fluphenazine without talking to your doctor, especially if you have taken large doses for a long time. Your doctor probably will want to decrease your dose gradually. This drug must be taken regularly for a few weeks before its full effect is felt.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking fluphenazine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to fluphenazine or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking fluphenazine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glaucoma, an enlarged prostate, difficulty urinating, seizures, an overactive thyroid gland, trouble keeping your balance, or liver, kidney, or heart disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, especially if you are in the last few months of your pregnancy, or if you plan to become pregnant or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking fluphenazine, call your doctor. Fluphenazine may cause problems in newborns following delivery if it is taken during the last months of pregnancy.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking fluphenazine.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Cigarette smoking may decrease the effectiveness of this drug.
you should know that fluphenazine may cause dizziness, lightheadedness, and fainting when you get up too quickly from a lying position. To avoid this problem, get out of bed slowly, resting your feet on the floor for a few minutes before standing up.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Side effects from fluphenazine are common:
upset stomach
weakness or tiredness
excitement or anxiety
insomnia
nightmares
dry mouth
skin more sensitive to sunlight than usual
changes in appetite or weight
Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
difficulty urinating
frequent urination
blurred vision
dizziness, feeling unsteady, or having trouble keeping your balance
changes in sex drive or ability
excessive sweating
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
jaw, neck, and back muscle spasms
slow or difficult speech
shuffling walk
falling
persistent fine tremor or inability to sit still
fever, chills, sore throat, or flu-like symptoms
difficulty breathing or swallowing
severe skin rash
yellowing of the skin or eyes
irregular heartbeat
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to fluphenazine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Permitil
®
¶
Prolixin
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page