Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/non-alcoholic-fatty-liver-disease/
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a buildup of excessive fat in the liver that can lead to liver damage resembling the damage caused by alcohol abuse, but that occurs in people who do not drink heavily. The liver is a part of the digestive system that helps break down food, store energy, and remove waste products, including toxins. The liver normally contains some fat; an individual is considered to have a fatty liver (hepatic steatosis) if the liver contains more than 5 to 10 percent fat.
The fat deposits in the liver associated with NAFLD usually cause no symptoms, although they may cause increased levels of liver enzymes that are detected in routine blood tests. Some affected individuals have abdominal pain or fatigue. During a physical examination, the liver may be found to be slightly enlarged.
Between 7 and 30 percent of people with NAFLD develop inflammation of the liver (non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, also known as NASH), leading to liver damage. Minor damage to the liver can be repaired by the body. However, severe or long-term damage can lead to the replacement of normal liver tissue with scar tissue (fibrosis), resulting in irreversible liver disease (cirrhosis) that causes the liver to stop working properly. Signs and symptoms of cirrhosis, which get worse as fibrosis affects more of the liver, include fatigue, weakness, loss of appetite, weight loss, nausea, swelling (edema), and yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice). Scarring in the vein that carries blood into the liver from the other digestive organs (the portal vein) can lead to increased pressure in that blood vessel (portal
hypertension
), resulting in swollen blood vessels (varices) within the digestive system. Rupture of these varices can cause life-threatening bleeding.
NAFLD and NASH are thought to account for many cases of cirrhosis that have no obvious underlying cause (
cryptogenic cirrhosis
); at least one-third of people with NASH eventually develop cirrhosis. People with NAFLD, NASH, and cirrhosis are also at increased risk of developing
liver cancer
(hepatocellular cancer).
NAFLD is most common in middle-aged or older people, although younger people, including children, are also affected. It is often considered as part of a group of conditions known collectively as the metabolic syndrome; in addition to NAFLD, the metabolic syndrome includes obesity,
type 2 diabetes
or pre-diabetes (insulin resistance), high levels of fats (lipids) such as cholesterol and triglycerides in the blood, and high blood pressure (hypertension). However, a person with NAFLD may not have all or any of the other conditions that make up the metabolic syndrome, and individuals with some or all of those conditions may not have NAFLD.
Frequency
NAFLD is a very common disorder, occurring in about 25 percent of the global population. Its prevalence is increasing along with the rising prevalence of obesity in industrialized societies, and it is now the most common chronic liver disorder in Western countries, including the United States. NAFLD is more prevalent in individuals of Hispanic, Native American, or Asian ancestry than in individuals of European or African ancestry.
Causes
The specific causes of NAFLD are unclear. Genetic variations and environmental factors contribute to the development of this complex disorder.
When fat from the diet exceeds the body's requirements and ability to break it down and eliminate it, some of the fat is stored in the liver. Researchers suggest that over-consumption of certain specific nutrients, such as iron, cholesterol, and refined sugars used in processed foods, may increase the likelihood of developing NAFLD.
It is unclear what causes NASH and cirrhosis to develop in some people with NAFLD. Researchers are studying several possible mechanisms. These include inflammation caused by an immune system reaction to the excess fatty tissue in the liver; toxic inflammatory chemicals (cytokines) released by the liver cells or fat cells; self-destruction (
apoptosis
) of liver cells; and the effect of unstable molecules called free radicals (oxidative stress). The effects of different populations of microorganisms in the intestines (gut microbiota) on the breakdown and absorption of nutrients are also an active area of research.
Studies have identified many genetic changes that may be associated with the development of NAFLD and NASH. Among these is a particular variation in the
PNPLA3
gene. This gene provides instructions for making a protein that is found in fat cells (adipocytes) and liver cells (hepatocytes). The function of this protein is not well understood, but it is thought to help regulate the production and breakdown of fats (lipogenesis and lipolysis) and the development of adipocytes. Studies indicate that the activity (expression) of the
PNPLA3
gene decreases during periods without food (fasting) and increases after eating, suggesting that the amount of PNPLA3 protein produced is regulated as needed to help process and store fats in the diet. The
PNPLA3
gene variation associated with NAFLD is thought to lead to increased production and decreased breakdown of fats in the liver. Research is ongoing to determine how this and other genetic changes contribute to the development of NAFLD and its complications.
Learn more about the gene associated with Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
PNPLA3
Additional Information from NCBI Gene:
APOC3
GCKR
MBOAT7
TM6SF2
TRIB1
Inheritance
An increased risk of developing NAFLD can be passed through generations in families, but the inheritance pattern is unknown. Variations in several genes as well as lifestyle and environmental factors contribute to the risk of developing this complex disorder.
Other Names for This Condition
Fatty liver
NAFLD
NASH
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
Steatosis
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Fatty liver disease, nonalcoholic, susceptibility to, 2
Genetic Testing Registry: NAFLD1
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
FATTY LIVER DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 1; FLD1
FATTY LIVER DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2; FLD2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Caligiuri A, Gentilini A, Marra F. Molecular Pathogenesis of NASH. Int J Mol
Sci. 2016 Sep 20;17(9):1575. doi: 10.3390/ijms17091575.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Chen LZ, Xin YN, Geng N, Jiang M, Zhang DD, Xuan SY. PNPLA3 I148M variant in
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: demographic and ethnic characteristics and the
role of the variant in nonalcoholic fatty liver fibrosis. World J Gastroenterol.
2015 Jan 21;21(3):794-802. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i3.794.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Dongiovanni P, Donati B, Fares R, Lombardi R, Mancina RM, Romeo S, Valenti L.
PNPLA3 I148M polymorphism and progressive liver disease. World J Gastroenterol.
2013 Nov 7;19(41):6969-78. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i41.6969.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Gu J, Yao M, Yao D, Wang L, Yang X, Yao D. Nonalcoholic Lipid Accumulation and
Hepatocyte Malignant Transformation. J Clin Transl Hepatol. 2016 Jun
28;4(2):123-30. doi: 10.14218/JCTH.2016.00010. Epub 2016 Jun 15.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Kahali B, Halligan B, Speliotes EK. Insights from Genome-Wide Association
Analyses of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease. Semin Liver Dis. 2015
Nov;35(4):375-91. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1567870. Epub 2015 Dec 16.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Kitamoto A, Kitamoto T, Nakamura T, Ogawa Y, Yoneda M, Hyogo H, Ochi H,
Mizusawa S, Ueno T, Nakao K, Sekine A, Chayama K, Nakajima A, Hotta K.
Association of polymorphisms in GCKR and TRIB1 with nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease and metabolic syndrome traits. Endocr J. 2014;61(7):683-9. doi:
10.1507/endocrj.ej14-0052. Epub 2014 May 1.
Citation on PubMed
Krawczyk M, Portincasa P, Lammert F. PNPLA3-associated steatohepatitis: toward
a gene-based classification of fatty liver disease. Semin Liver Dis. 2013
Nov;33(4):369-79. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1358525. Epub 2013 Nov 12.
Citation on PubMed
Mancina RM, Dongiovanni P, Petta S, Pingitore P, Meroni M, Rametta R, Boren J,
Montalcini T, Pujia A, Wiklund O, Hindy G, Spagnuolo R, Motta BM, Pipitone RM,
Craxi A, Fargion S, Nobili V, Kakela P, Karja V, Mannisto V, Pihlajamaki J,
Reilly DF, Castro-Perez J, Kozlitina J, Valenti L, Romeo S. The MBOAT7-TMC4
Variant rs641738 Increases Risk of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease in
Individuals of European Descent. Gastroenterology. 2016 May;150(5):1219-1230.e6.
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2016.01.032. Epub 2016 Feb 2.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Severson TJ, Besur S, Bonkovsky HL. Genetic factors that affect nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease: A systematic clinical review. World J Gastroenterol. 2016
Aug 7;22(29):6742-56. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v22.i29.6742.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Yu J, Marsh S, Hu J, Feng W, Wu C. The Pathogenesis of Nonalcoholic Fatty
Liver Disease: Interplay between Diet, Gut Microbiota, and Genetic Background.
Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2016;2016:2862173. doi: 10.1155/2016/2862173. Epub 2016
May 9.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Fatty Liver Disease
Genetic Disorders
Liver Cancer
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Cirrhosis
Genetics
Liver biopsy
Liver function tests
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page