Chlorhexidine mouth rinse: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Chlorhexidine mouth rinse
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625015.html
Chlorhexidine mouth rinse
pronounced as (klor hex′ i deen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Chlorhexidine is used to treat gingivitis (redness and swelling of the gums). Chlorhexidine is in a class of medications called anti-infectant agents. It works by decreasing the amount of bacteria in the mouth.
How should this medicine be used?
Chlorhexidine comes as a solution (liquid) to use as a mouth rinse. It is used twice a day in the morning and evening after brushing your teeth. Use chlorhexidine at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor, dentist, or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed.
To use the oral rinse, follow these steps:
Use 1/2 ounce (15 mL) of the solution or to the fill mark in the cap.
Rinse or swish the solution in your mouth for 30 seconds.
Spit out the solution after rinsing. Do
not
swallow the solution.
Do not rinse your mouth with water or mouthwash, brush teeth, or eat immediately after using chlorhexidine solution.
Ask your pharmacist, dentist, or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using chlorhexidine,
tell your doctor, dentist, and pharmacist if you are allergic to chlorhexidine, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in chlorhexidine oral rinse. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor, dentist, and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor or dentist if you have or have ever had periodontitis.
tell your doctor or dentist if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using chlorhexidine, call your doctor.
you should know that chlorhexidine solution may stain your teeth, tongue, and areas of repair to damaged or missing teeth. It can also cause an increased build-up of tartar. Be sure to brush and floss your teeth daily, especially any areas that are discolored. See your dentist at least every 6 months to remove any stain or tartar.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor or dentist tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Chlorhexidine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor or dentist if any of these symptoms or those mentioned in the SPECIAL PRECAUTION section are severe or do not go away:
changes in taste of food and beverages
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash, itching, swelling of the mouth or throat, difficulty breathing, light headedness, rapid heart rate, upset stomach or diarrhea
Chlorhexidine may cause permanent staining of front teeth fillings. Talk to your dentist or doctor about the risks of using this medication.
Chlorhexidine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor or dentist if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor or dentist may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
Call your local poison control center at
1-800-222-1222
. If a small child (weighing about 22 pounds [10kg]) swallows ≥4 ounces of chlorhexidine oral rinse, get emergency medical care. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
nausea
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and dentist.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Peridex
®
Periogard
®
(alcohol-free)
Last Revised -
06/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page