Talimogene Laherparepvec Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Talimogene Laherparepvec Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a616006.html
Talimogene Laherparepvec Injection
pronounced as (tal im' oh jeen la her'' pa rep' vek)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Talimogene laherparepvec injection is used to treat certain melanoma (a type of skin cancer) tumors that cannot be removed surgically or that came back after being treated with surgery. Talimogene laherparepvec is in a class of medications called oncolytic viruses. It is a weakened and changed form of Herpes Simplex Virus Type I (HSV-1 'cold sore virus') that works by helping to kill cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Talimogene laherparepvec injection comes as a suspension (liquid) to be injected by a doctor or nurse in a medical office. Your doctor will inject the medicine directly into tumors that are on your skin, just below your skin, or in your lymph nodes. You will receive a second treatment 3 weeks after the first treatment, and then every 2 weeks afterwards. The length of treatment depends on how well your tumors respond to treatment. Your doctor may not inject all of the tumors at each visit.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with talimogene laherparepvec and each time you receive the injections. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving talimogene laherparepvec injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to talimogene laherparepvec, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in the talimogene laherparepvec injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with talimogene laherparepvec injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with talimogene laherparepvec injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before receiving talimogene laherparepvec with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while receiving talimogene laherparepvec, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had leukemia (cancer of the white blood cells), lymphoma (cancer of a part of the immune system), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), or any other condition that causes a weakened immune system. Your doctor will probably not want you not to receive talimogene laherparepvec injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had radiation treatment in the area of the melanoma tumors, multiple myeloma (cancer of the plasma cells in the bone marrow), any type of autoimmune disease (conditions in which the immune system attacks healthy parts of the body and causes pain, swelling, and damage), or if you have close contact with someone who is pregnant or has a weakened immune system.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. You should not become pregnant during your treatment with talimogene laherparepvec injection. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. If you become pregnant while receiving talimogene laherparepvec injection, call your doctor immediately. Talimogene laherparepvec injection may harm the fetus.
you should know that talimogene laherparepvec injection contains a virus that could spread and infect other people. You should be careful to cover all the injection sites with airtight and watertight bandages for at least 1 week after each treatment, or longer if the injection site is oozing. If the bandages become loose or fall off, be sure to replace them right away. You should use rubber or latex gloves when bandaging the injection sites. You should be sure to put all cleaning materials, gloves, and bandages that were used for the injection sites into a sealed plastic bag and throw them away into the garbage.
you should not touch or scratch the injection sites or bandages. This can spread the virus in the talimogene laherparepvec medication to other parts of your body. The people around you should be careful not to come into direct contact with your injections sites, bandages, or bodily fluids. Call your doctor immediately if you, or anyone around you, develops signs of a herpes infection;: pain, burning, or tingling in a blister by your mouth, genitals, fingers, or ears; eye pain, redness, or tearing; blurry vision; sensitivity to light; weakness in arms or legs; extreme drowsiness; or mental confusion.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Talimogene laherparepvec injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
unusual tiredness
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
abdominal pain
headache
dizziness
weight loss
dry, cracked, itching, burning skin
muscle or joint pain
pain in arms or legs
slowed healing of injection sites
pain at the injection sites
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, call your doctor immediately:
shortness of breath or other breathing problems
cough
pink, cola colored, or foamy urine
swelling of face, hands, feet, or stomach
losing color in your skin, hair, or eyes
warm, red, swollen, or painful skin around injection area
fever, sore throat, chills, or other signs of infection
dead tissue or open sores on the injected tumors
Talimogene laherparepvec injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about talimogene laherparepvec injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Imlygic
®
Other names
T-Vec
Last Revised -
02/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page