Colestipol: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Colestipol
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682157.html
Colestipol
pronounced as (koe les' ti pole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Colestipol is used along with diet changes to decrease the amount of fatty substances such as low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol ('bad cholesterol') in certain people with high cholesterol. Colestipol is in a class of medications called bile acid sequestrants. It works by binding bile acids in your intestines to form a product that is removed from the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Colestipol comes as tablets and granules to take by mouth. The tablets are usually taken once or twice daily. The granules are usually taken one to six times daily. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take colestipol exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Unless otherwise instructed, take all other medications at least 1 hour before or 4 hours after you take colestipol because it can interfere with their absorption.
Swallow the tablets whole with a glass of water or another liquid; do not chew, split, or crush them.
Your doctor may gradually increase your dose at 1 to 2 month intervals, depending on your response.
Continue to take colestipol even if you feel well. Do not stop taking colestipol without talking to your doctor.
Do not take the granules dry. Add them to at least 3 ounces (90 milliliters) of a liquid (e.g., fruit juice, water, milk, or soft drink) and stir until completely mixed. If you use a carbonated beverage, mix it slowly in a large glass to minimize foaming. After taking the dose, rinse the glass with a small amount of additional liquid and drink it to be sure that you receive the entire dose.
Colestipol also may be mixed with hot or regular breakfast cereals, thin soups (e.g., tomato and chicken noodle), or pulpy fruit (e.g., crushed pineapple, pears, peaches, and fruit cocktail).
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking colestipol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to colestipol, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in colestipol preparations. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking colestipol. . Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with colestipol: oral phospate supplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking colestipol. Do not start any of these medications while taking colestipole without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had unusual bleeding, an underactive thyroid gland, heart or intestinal disease, or if you have hemorrhoids.
if you are taking gemfibrozil (Lopid), take it 2 hours before or 2 hours after colestipol.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking colestipol, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Eat a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet. Be sure to follow all exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian. You can also visit the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) website for additional dietary information at
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/chol/chol_tlc.pdf
.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Colestipol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
constipation
belching
nausea
vomiting
gas
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor immediately:
unusual bleeding (such as bleeding from the gums or rectum)
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to colestipol.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Colestid
®
Colestid
®
Flavored Granules
Colestid
®
Granules
Last Revised -
09/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page