Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a610017.html
Pneumococcal Conjugate Vaccine
Why get vaccinated?
What is pneumococcal conjugate vaccine?
Who should get pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and when?
Talk with your healthcare provider
What are the risks of a vaccine reaction?
What if there is a serious reaction?
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
How can I learn more?
Brand names
Other names
Why get vaccinated?
Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13, PCV15, PCV20, and PCV21) can prevent pneumococcal disease.
Pneumococcal disease refers to any illness caused by pneumococcal bacteria. These bacteria can cause many types of illnesses, including pneumonia, which is an infection of the lungs. Pneumococcal bacteria are one of the most common causes of pneumonia.
Besides pneumonia, pneumococcal bacteria can also cause:
Ear infections
Sinus infections
Meningitis (infection of the tissue covering the brain and spinal cord)
Bacteremia (infection of the blood)
Anyone can get pneumococcal disease, but children under 5 years of age, people with certain medical conditions, and adults 50 years and older are at the highest risk.
Most pneumococcal infections are mild. However, some can result in long-term problems, such as brain damage or hearing loss. Meningitis, bacteremia, and pneumonia caused by pneumococcal disease can be fatal.
What is pneumococcal conjugate vaccine?
Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine helps protect against bacteria that cause pneumococcal disease.
There are four pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PCV13, PCV15, PCV20, and PCV21). The different vaccines are recommended for different people based on their age and medical status.
Who should get pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and when?
PCV15 and PCV20 vaccine
Infants and young children usually need 4 doses of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV15 or PCV20), at ages 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, and 12–15 months.
Children 24–59 months of age may receive pneumococcal conjugate vaccine if they did not receive the recommended doses as infants and young children.
Children and adolescents 6–18 years of age with certain medical conditions may need a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine if they did not already receive the recommended doses of PCV13, PCV15, or PCV20.
PCV15, PCV20, and PCV21 vaccine
Adults 19–50 years old with certain medical conditions or other risk factors who have not already received a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine should receive either:
a single dose of PCV15 followed by a dose of pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23), or
a single dose of PCV20
a single dose of PCV21
Adults 50 years old or older who have not already received a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine should receive either:
a single dose of PCV15 followed by a dose of PPSV23, or
single dose of PCV20
a single dose of PCV21
Some adults who have already received a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine may need another type of pneumococcal conjugate vaccine. Your health care provider can give you more information.
Talk with your healthcare provider
Tell your vaccination provider if the person getting the vaccine:
Has had an allergic reaction after a previous dose of PCV13, PCV15, PCV20, PCV21 or to an earlier pneumococcal conjugate vaccine known as PCV7, or to any vaccine containing diphtheria toxoid (for example, DTaP), or has any severe, life-threatening allergies
In some cases, your health care provider may decide to postpone pneumococcal conjugate vaccination until a future visit.
People with minor illnesses, such as a cold, may be vaccinated. People who are moderately or severely ill should usually wait until they recover before getting pneumococcal conjugate vaccine.
Your health care provider can give you more information.
What are the risks of a vaccine reaction?
Redness, swelling, pain, or tenderness where the shot is given, and fever, loss of appetite, fussiness (irritability), feeling tired, headache, and chills can happen after pneumococcal conjugate vaccination.
Young children may be at increased risk for seizures caused by fever after pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) if it is administered at the same time as inactivated influenza vaccine. Ask your health care provider for more information.
People sometimes faint after medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your provider if you feel dizzy or have vision changes or ringing in the ears.
As with any medicine, there is a very remote chance of a vaccine causing a severe allergic reaction, other serious injury, or death.
What if there is a serious reaction?
An allergic reaction could occur after the vaccinated person leaves the clinic. If you see signs of a severe allergic reaction (hives, swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, or weakness), call
9-1-1
and get the person to the nearest hospital.
For other signs that concern you, call your health care provider.
Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself. Visit the VAERS website at
https://www.vaers.hhs.gov
or call
1-800-822-7967
.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions, and VAERS staff does not give medical advice.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a federal program that was created to compensate people who may have been injured by certain vaccines. Claims regarding alleged injury or death due to vaccination have a time limit for filing, which may be as short as two years. Visit the VICP website at
https://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation
or call
1-800-338-2382
to learn about the program and about filing a claim.
How can I learn more?
Ask your healthcare provider. He or she can give you the vaccine package insert or suggest other sources of information.
Call your local or state health department.
Visit the website of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for vaccine package inserts and additional information at
https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/vaccines
.
Contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): call
1-800-232-4636
(
1-800-CDC-INFO
) or visit CDC's website at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines
.
Brand names
Capvaxive
®
Prevnar 13
®
Prevnar 20
®
Vaxneuvance
®
Other names
PCV13
PCV15
PCV20
PCV 21
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page