Flurbiprofen Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Flurbiprofen Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611017.html
Flurbiprofen Ophthalmic
pronounced as (flur'' bi proe' fen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Flurbiprofen ophthalmic is used to prevent or reduce changes in the eye that may occur during eye surgery. Flurbiprofen ophthalmic is in a class of medications called nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). It works by stopping the release of certain natural substances that cause pain and swelling.
How should this medicine be used?
Flurbiprofen ophthalmic comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eyes. It is usually instilled in the eye(s) undergoing surgery every 30 minutes beginning 2 hours before surgery for a total of four doses. Use flurbiprofen ophthalmic exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor. Try not to blink or squeeze your eyelids.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using flurbiprofen eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to flurbiprofen, aspirin, or any of the ingredients in flurbiprofen eye drops. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using flurbiprofen eye drops. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you closely for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with flurbiprofen eye drops: aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, others) and naproxen (Aleve. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using flurbiprofen eye drops. Do not start any of these medications while using flurbiprofen eye drops without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever any condition that causes you to bleed easily.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
you should know that flurbiprofen eye drops may slow healing of the eye after surgery. Call your doctor right away if your pain and swelling do not improve.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Flurbiprofen eye drops may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stinging or burning of the eyes
an increase or decrease in size of the pupil (dark area in the center of the eye)
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
bleeding within the eye
sensitivity to light
eye pain
blurry, cloudy, or blocked areas of vision
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows flurbiprofen eye drops, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ocufen
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page