Amphotericin B Lipid Complex Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Amphotericin B Lipid Complex Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601132.html
Amphotericin B Lipid Complex Injection
pronounced as (am foe ter' i sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Amphotericin B lipid complex injection is used to treat serious, possibly life-threatening fungal infections in people who did not respond or are unable to tolerate conventional amphotericin B therapy. Amphotericin B lipid complex injection is in a class of medications called antifungals. It works by slowing the growth of fungi that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Amphotericin B lipid complex injection comes as a suspension (liquid) to be injected intravenously (into a vein). It is usually infused (injected slowly) intravenously once daily. The length of your treatment depends on your general health, how you tolerate the medication, and the type of infection you have.
You may experience a reaction while you receive a dose of amphotericin B lipid complex injection, usually happen 1 to 2 hours after starting your infusion. These reactions are usually more common and more severe with the first few doses of amphotericin B lipid complex. Your health care provider may prescribe other medications to decrease these side effects. Tell your doctor immediately if you experience any of these symptoms while you receive amphotericin B lipid complex injection: fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, shortness of breath, breathing problems, chest pain, dizziness, loss of consciousness, or fast, irregular, or pounding heartbeat.
You may receive amphotericin B injection in a hospital or you may use the medication at home. If you will be using amphotericin B lipid complex injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to infuse the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions. Ask your healthcare provider what to do if you have any problems infusing amphotericin B lipid complex injection.
If your symptoms do not improve or get worse while receiving amphotericin B lipid complex, tell your doctor. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish amphotericin B lipid complex injection, tell your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving amphotericin B lipid complex injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to amphotericin B, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in amphotericin B lipid complex injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving amphotericin B lipid complex injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription products may interact with amphotericin B lipid complex: antifungals [clotrimazole, ketoconazole (Nizoral
®
), miconazole (Monistat
®
)]. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start receiving amphotericin B lipid complex. Do not start any of these medications while receiving amphotericin B lipid complex without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you are receiving leukocyte (white blood cell) transfusions.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while receiving amphotericin B lipid complex injection, call your doctor. Do not breast-feed while receiving amphotericin B complex lipid injection.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are receiving amphotericin B lipid complex injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Amphotericin B lipid complex injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stomach pain or cramping
heartburn
diarrhea
weight loss
loss of appetite
muscle or joint pain
injection site redness or swelling
pale skin
shortness of breath
dizziness
headache
coldness in the hands and feet
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
skin blisters
wheezing
difficulty breathing
itching
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes
bloody vomit
black and tarry stools
blood in stool
yellowing of the skin or eyes
decreased urination
Amphotericin B lipid complex injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests during your treatment to check your body's response to amphotericin B lipid complex injection.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Abelcet
®
Amphotec
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page