Nedocromil Ophthalmic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nedocromil Ophthalmic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601243.html
Nedocromil Ophthalmic
pronounced as (ne doe kroe' mil)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ophthalmic nedocromil is used to treat itchy eyes caused by allergies. Symptoms of allergies occur when cells in your body called mast cells release substances after you come in contact with something to which you are allergic. Nedocromil is in a class of drugs called mast cell stabilizers. It works by stopping the release of these substances.
How should this medicine be used?
Ophthalmic nedocromil comes as a solution (liquid) to instill in the eyes. It is usually instilled twice daily. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use nedocromil exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your allergy symptom (itchy eyes) should improve when you instill the eye drops. If your symptoms do not improve or they worsen, call your doctor.
Continue to use nedocromil even if your eyes feel better. Continue to use it until you are no longer exposed to the substance that causes your symptoms, allergy season is over, or your doctor tells you to stop using it.
To instill the eye drops, follow these steps:
Wash your hands thoroughly with soap and water.
Check the dropper tip to make sure that it is not chipped or cracked.
Avoid touching the dropper tip against your eye or anything else; eye drops and droppers must be kept clean.
While tilting your head back, pull down the lower lid of your eye with your index finger to form a pocket.
Hold the dropper (tip down) with the other hand, as close to the eye as possible without touching it.
Brace the remaining fingers of that hand against your face.
While looking up, gently squeeze the dropper so that a single drop falls into the pocket made by the lower eyelid. Remove your index finger from the lower eyelid.
Blink you eye a few times to help spread the solution over your entire eye.
Close your eye for 2 to 3 minutes and tip your head down as though looking at the floor.
Place a finger on the tear duct and apply gentle pressure.
Wipe any excess liquid from your face with a tissue.
If you are to use more than one drop in the same eye, wait at least 5 minutes before instilling the next drop.
Replace and tighten the cap on the dropper bottle. Do not wipe or rinse the dropper tip.
Wash your hands to remove any medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using nedocromil eye drops,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nedocromil or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking, including vitamins or herbal products.
tell you doctor if you wear contact lenses; you should not wear contact lenses while your eyes are itchy and red due to allergies.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Instill the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not instill a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nedocromil may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
stinging or burning of the eyes
blurred vision
increased eye redness or itching
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Alocril
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page