Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/glutamate-formiminotransferase-deficiency/
Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency
Description
Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency is a rare inherited disorder that can affect development.
In the past, researchers recognized a mild form and a severe form of glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency. Researchers have since found people who received a diagnosis of glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency as infants who do not appear to have any related health problems. Researchers are actively working to learn more about this condition.
The signs and symptoms associated with glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency have ranged from mild developmental delays with high urine levels of a molecule called formiminoglutamate (FIGLU) to more severe intellectual disabilities and megaloblastic anemia. Megaloblastic anemia occurs when a person has a low number of red blood cells (anemia) and the remaining red blood cells are larger than normal (megaloblastic).
Frequency
Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency has an estimated incidence of between 1 in 46,000 people and 1 in 60,000 people, but fewer than 100 people with this condition have been reported in the medical literature. Individuals with the severe form of the disorder have all been of Japanese ancestry.
Causes
Variants (also called mutations) in the
FTCD
gene cause glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency. The
FTCD
gene provides instructions for making an enzyme that is involved in the breakdown of histidine, which is a building block (amino acid) of many different proteins. One of the enzyme's jobs is to convert FIGLU to a molecule called 5-formiminotetrahydrofolate.
The
FTCD
gene variants that cause glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency alter the function of the FTCD enzyme, which disrupts the enzyme’s ability to completely break down histidine. This can cause FIGLU to build up in the body and be released in the urine. It is unclear exactly how these changes are related to the specific health problems seen in some people with glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency.
Learn more about the gene associated with Glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency
FTCD
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell must have a variant to cause the disorder. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the altered gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Arakawa syndrome 1
FIGLU-uria
Formiminoglutamic acidemia
Formiminoglutamic aciduria
Formiminotransferase cyclodeaminase deficiency
Formiminotransferase deficiency
FTCD deficiency
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: GLUTAMATE FORMIMINOTRANSFERASE DEFICIENCY
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Formiminoglutamic aciduria
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
GLUTAMATE FORMIMINOTRANSFERASE DEFICIENCY
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Ahrens-Nicklas RC, Ganetzky RD, Rush PW, Conway RL, Ficicioglu C.
Characteristics and outcomes of patients with formiminoglutamic aciduria detected
through newborn screening. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2019 Jan;42(1):140-146. doi:
10.1002/jimd.12035.
Citation on PubMed
Fowler B. The folate cycle and disease in humans. Kidney Int Suppl. 2001
Feb;78:S221-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1755.2001.59780221.x.
Citation on PubMed
Hilton JF, Christensen KE, Watkins D, Raby BA, Renaud Y, de la Luna S,
Estivill X, MacKenzie RE, Hudson TJ, Rosenblatt DS. The molecular basis of
glutamate formiminotransferase deficiency. Hum Mutat. 2003 Jul;22(1):67-73. doi:
10.1002/humu.10236.
Citation on PubMed
Majumdar R, Yori A, Rush PW, Raymond K, Gavrilov D, Tortorelli S, Matern D,
Rinaldo P, Feldman GL, Oglesbee D. Allelic spectrum of
formiminotransferase-cyclodeaminase gene variants in individuals with
formiminoglutamic aciduria. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2017 Nov;5(6):795-799. doi:
10.1002/mgg3.333. Epub 2017 Sep 11.
Citation on PubMed
Niederwieser A, Giliberti P, Matasovic A, Pluznik S, Steinmann B, Baerlocher
K. Folic acid non-dependent formiminoglutamic aciduria in two siblings. Clin Chim
Acta. 1974 Aug 20;54(3):293-316. doi: 10.1016/0009-8981(74)90248-4. No abstract
available.
Citation on PubMed
Whitehead VM. Acquired and inherited disorders of cobalamin and folate in
children. Br J Haematol. 2006 Jul;134(2):125-36. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2141.2006.06133.x.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders
Genetic Brain Disorders
Genetic Disorders
Newborn Screening
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Megaloblastic Anemia (Image)
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page