Hartsfield syndrome: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Hartsfield syndrome
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/hartsfield-syndrome/
Hartsfield syndrome
Description
Hartsfield syndrome is a rare condition characterized by holoprosencephaly, which is an abnormality of brain development, and a malformation of the hands and feet called ectrodactyly.
During early development before birth, the brain normally divides into two halves, the right and left
hemispheres
. Holoprosencephaly occurs when the brain fails to divide properly. In
the most severe forms of holoprosencephaly
, the brain does not divide at all. These affected individuals have one central eye (cyclopia) and a tubular nasal structure (proboscis) located above the eye. Most babies with severe holoprosencephaly die before birth or soon after. In
less severe cases of holoprosencephaly
, the brain is partially divided. The life expectancy of these affected individuals depends on the severity of signs and symptoms.
People with Hartsfield syndrome often have other brain abnormalities associated with holoprosencephaly. Affected individuals may have a malfunctioning pituitary, which is a gland located at the base of the brain that produces several hormones. Because pituitary dysfunction leads to the partial or complete absence of these hormones, it can cause a variety of disorders. These include diabetes insipidus, which disrupts the balance between fluid intake and urine excretion; a shortage (deficiency) of
growth hormone
, leading to slow or delayed growth; and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, which affects the production of hormones that direct sexual development. Dysfunction in other parts of the brain can cause seizures, feeding difficulties, and problems regulating body temperature and sleep patterns. People with Hartsfield syndrome have delayed development that ranges from mild to severe.
The other hallmark feature of Hartsfield syndrome is ectrodactyly. Ectrodactyly is a deep split in the
hands
,
feet
, or both, with missing fingers or toes and partial fusion of the remaining digits. It can affect the hands and feet on one or both sides. Other features that have been described in people with Hartsfield syndrome include premature fusion of certain bones of the skull (craniosynostosis), heart defects, abnormalities of the bones of the spine (vertebrae), and abnormal genitalia. Some affected individuals have distinctive facial features, including eyes that are widely spaced (
hypertelorism
) or closely spaced (
hypotelorism
), ears that are abnormally small or unusually shaped, and a split in the lip (
cleft lip
) with or without an opening in the roof of the mouth (
cleft palate
).
Frequency
Hartsfield syndrome appears to be a rare disorder. Fewer than 20 cases have been reported in the medical literature. For unknown reasons, most of the people who have been diagnosed with this disorder are male.
Causes
Hartsfield syndrome is caused by mutations in the
FGFR1
gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1). This receptor interacts with proteins called fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) to trigger signaling within cells. Signaling via the FGFR1 protein is involved in many critical processes, such as cell division and the regulation of cell growth and maturation. This signaling is important for the normal development and growth of several parts of the body, including the brain, bones of the head and face (craniofacial bones), and bones in the hands and feet.
The
FGFR1
gene mutations that cause Hartsfield syndrome severely disrupt the function of the FGFR1 protein, including its ability to bind to FGFs. As a result, the receptor is unable to transmit signals properly, which impairs many aspects of normal development. It is unclear how these changes lead specifically to holoprosencephaly, ectrodactyly, and the other features of Hartsfield syndrome.
Some people with Hartsfield syndrome do not have an identified mutation in the
FGFR1
gene. In these cases, the cause of the condition is unknown. Researchers are looking for other genetic changes that may also be associated with this disorder.
Learn more about the gene associated with Hartsfield syndrome
FGFR1
Inheritance
Hartsfield syndrome can have either an
autosomal dominant
or
autosomal recessive
pattern of inheritance. Autosomal dominant inheritance means one copy of the altered gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the disorder. In these cases, the condition usually results from a
new (de novo) mutation
in the
FGFR1
gene that occurs during the formation of reproductive cells (eggs or sperm) or in early embryonic development. Most of these affected individuals have no history of the disorder in their family. However, in a small number of cases, people with Hartsfield syndrome have inherited the altered gene from an unaffected parent who has an
FGFR1
gene mutation only in the sperm or egg cells. This phenomenon is called germline mosaicism.
Less commonly, Hartsfield syndrome is inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Hartsfield-Bixler-Demyer syndrome
HHES
Holoprosencephaly and split hand/foot syndrome
Holoprosencephaly, ectrodactyly, and bilateral cleft lip/palate
Holoprosencephaly, hypertelorism, and ectrodactyly syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Hartsfield-Bixler-Demyer syndrome
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Hartsfield syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
HARTSFIELD SYNDROME; HRTFDS
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Dhamija R, Babovic-Vuksanovic D. FGFR1-Related Hartsfield Syndrome.
2016 Mar 3 [updated 2022 May 12]. In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA,
Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(R) [Internet]. Seattle (WA):
University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2025. Available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK349073/
Citation on PubMed
Dhamija R, Kirmani S, Wang X, Ferber MJ, Wieben ED, Lazaridis KN,
Babovic-Vuksanovic D. Novel de novo heterozygous FGFR1 mutation in two siblings
with Hartsfield syndrome: a case of gonadal mosaicism. Am J Med Genet A. 2014
Sep;164A(9):2356-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36621. Epub 2014 May 28.
Citation on PubMed
Hong S, Hu P, Marino J, Hufnagel SB, Hopkin RJ, Toromanovic A, Richieri-Costa
A, Ribeiro-Bicudo LA, Kruszka P, Roessler E, Muenke M. Dominant-negative kinase
domain mutations in FGFR1 can explain the clinical severity of Hartsfield
syndrome. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 May 15;25(10):1912-1922. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw064.
Epub 2016 Feb 29.
Citation on PubMed
Prasad R, Brewer C, Burren CP. Hartsfield syndrome associated with a novel
heterozygous missense mutation in FGFR1 and incorporating tumoral calcinosis. Am
J Med Genet A. 2016 Aug;170(8):2222-5. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37731. Epub 2016 May
12. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Shi Y, Dhamija R, Wren C, Wang X, Babovic-Vuksanovic D, Spector E. Detection
of gonadal mosaicism in Hartsfield syndrome by next generation sequencing. Am J
Med Genet A. 2016 Dec;170(12):3359. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37869. Epub 2016 Sep 8.
No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Simonis N, Migeotte I, Lambert N, Perazzolo C, de Silva DC, Dimitrov B,
Heinrichs C, Janssens S, Kerr B, Mortier G, Van Vliet G, Lepage P, Casimir G,
Abramowicz M, Smits G, Vilain C. FGFR1 mutations cause Hartsfield syndrome, the
unique association of holoprosencephaly and ectrodactyly. J Med Genet. 2013
Sep;50(9):585-92. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-101603. Epub 2013 Jun 28.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Vilain C, Mortier G, Van Vliet G, Dubourg C, Heinrichs C, de Silva D, Verloes
A, Baumann C. Hartsfield holoprosencephaly-ectrodactyly syndrome in five male
patients: further delineation and review. Am J Med Genet A. 2009
Jul;149A(7):1476-81. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32678.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Brain Malformations
Cleft Lip and Palate
Craniofacial Abnormalities
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Central diabetes insipidus
Genetics
Growth hormone deficiency - children
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page