Faricimab-svoa Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Faricimab-svoa Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624073.html
Faricimab-svoa Injection
pronounced as (far ik′ i mab)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Faricimab-svoa injection is used to treat wet age-related macular degeneration (AMD; an ongoing disease of the eye that causes loss of the ability to see straight ahead and may make it more difficult to read, drive, or perform other daily activities). Faricimab-svoa injection is also used to treat diabetic macular edema (DME; an eye disease caused by diabetes that can lead to vision loss). Faricimab-svoa injection is also used to treat macular edema after retinal vein occlusion (an eye disease caused by blockage of blood flow from the eye that leads to blurry vision and vision loss). Faricimab-svoa is in a class of medications called vascular endothelial growth factor-A (VEGF-A) and angiopoietin 2 (Ang-2) inhibitors. It works by stopping abnormal blood vessel growth and leakage in the eye(s) that may cause vision loss.
How should this medicine be used?
Faricimab-svoa injection comes as a solution (liquid) to be injected into the eye by a doctor. If you are receiving faricimab-svoa injection to treat wet AMD or diabetic macular edema, it is usually given in a doctor's office once a month for the first 4 or 6 doses, and then once every 1 to 4 months thereafter. If you are receiving faricimab-svoa injection to treat retinal vein occlusion, it is usually given in a doctor's office once every 4 weeks for 6 months. Your doctor will give you injections on a schedule that is best for you and your condition.
Before you receive a faricimab-svoa injection, your doctor will clean your eye to prevent infection and numb your eye to reduce discomfort during the injection. You may feel pressure in your eye when the medication is injected. After your injection, your doctor will need to examine your eyes before you leave the office.
Faricimab-svoa controls certain eye conditions, but does not cure them. Your doctor will watch you carefully to see how well faricimab-svoa works for you. Talk to your doctor about how long you should continue treatment with faricimab-svoa injection.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking faricimab-svoa injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to faricimab-svoa, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in faricimab-svoa injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have an infection or swelling in or around the eye. Your doctor will probably tell you that you should not receive faricimab-svoa injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. You should not become pregnant right before starting your treatment and during your treatment, and for 3 months after your last injection with faricimab-svoa injection. Use effective birth control before and during your treatment, and for at least 3 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about how long you should use birth control after your treatment with faricimab-svoa injection. If you become pregnant while receiving an faricimab-svoa injection product, call your doctor.
You should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women.
you should know that faricimab-svoa injection may cause vision problems shortly after you receive the injection. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive faricimab-svoa injection, call your doctor as soon as possible.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Faricimab-svoa injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
feeling like something is in your eye
teary eyes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
eye redness or pain
eye sensitivity to light
blurred vision
decrease or changes in vision
seeing "floaters" or small specks
bleeding in or around the eye
chest pain
shortness of breath
slow or difficult speech
weakness or numbness of an arm or leg
hives, rash, itching, or skin redness
Faricimab-svoa injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor will monitor your response to faricimab-svoa injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about faricimab-svoa injection.
Brand names
Vabysmo
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page