Cromolyn Sodium Nasal Solution: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Cromolyn Sodium Nasal Solution
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682713.html
Cromolyn Sodium Nasal Solution
pronounced as (kroe' moe lin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Cromolyn is used to prevent and treat stuffy nose, sneezing, runny nose, and other symptoms caused by allergies. It works by preventing the release of substances that cause inflammation (swelling) in the air passages of the nose.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Cromolyn comes as a solution to use with a special nasal applicator. It usually is inhaled three to six times a day to prevent allergy symptoms. It is most effective when used before you come in contact with substances that cause allergies. If you have seasonal allergies, continue to use the drug until the season is over.
Follow the directions on the package or your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use cromolyn exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than directed or prescribed by your doctor.
It may take up to 4 weeks for cromolyn to work. If your symptoms have not improved after 4 weeks, tell your doctor.
Cromolyn is used with a special applicator (Nasalmatic). Before you use cromolyn for the first time, read the instructions provided with the solution. Ask your doctor, pharmacist, or respiratory therapist to demonstrate the proper technique. Practice using the device while in his or her presence.
If you are to use the nasal spray, first blow your nose, and clear it as much as possible. Insert the applicator into a nostril. Sniff as you squeeze the sprayer once. To prevent mucous from entering the sprayer, do not release your grip until after you remove the sprayer from your nose. Repeat this process for your other nostril.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using cromolyn,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to cromolyn or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using cromolyn, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Cromolyn may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
itching or burning nasal passages
sneezing
headache
stomach pain
If you experience either of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
wheezing
increased difficulty breathing
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Follow the written instructions for care and cleaning of the special nasal applicator. The applicator should be replaced every 6 months.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nasalcrom
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page