Semaglutide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Semaglutide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618008.html
Semaglutide Injection
pronounced as (sem" a gloo' tide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Semaglutide injection may increase the risk that you will develop thyroid tumors, including a type of thyroid cancer. Semaglutide injection caused thyroid tumors in rats. It is not known if this medication increases the risk of tumors in humans. Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had thyroid cancer or Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia syndrome type 2 (MEN 2; condition that causes tumors in more than one gland in the body). If so, your doctor will probably tell you not to use semaglutide injection. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: a lump or swelling in the neck; hoarseness; difficulty swallowing; or shortness of breath.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain tests to check your body's response to semaglutide injection.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with semaglutide injection and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of using semaglutide injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Semaglutide injection is used for the following:
to control blood sugar levels in certain patients with type 2 diabetes (condition in which blood sugar is too high because the body does not make or use insulin normally).
to reduce the risk of a heart attack, stroke, or death in adults with type 2 diabetes and heart and blood vessel disease.
to reduce the risk of a heart attack, stroke, or death in adults who are obese or overweight and have heart and blood vessel disease.
to reduce the risk of worsening of kidney disease and death in certain adults with type 2 diabetes and kidney disease
to assist with weight loss in certain people who are obese or overweight and have weight-related medical problems.
Semaglutide injection is in a class of medications called incretin mimetics. It works by helping the pancreas to release the right amount of insulin when blood sugar levels are high. Insulin helps move sugar from the blood into other body tissues where it is used for energy. Semaglutide injection also slows the emptying of the stomach and may decrease appetite and cause weight loss.
Over time, people who have diabetes and high blood sugar can develop serious or life-threatening complications, including heart disease, stroke, kidney problems, nerve damage, and eye problems. Using medication(s), making lifestyle changes (e.g., diet, exercise, quitting smoking), and regularly checking your blood sugar may help to manage your diabetes and improve your health. This therapy may also decrease your chances of having a heart attack, stroke, or other diabetes-related complications such as kidney failure, nerve damage (numb, cold legs or feet; decreased sexual ability in men and women), eye problems, including changes or loss of vision, or gum disease. Your doctor and other healthcare providers will talk to you about the best way to manage your diabetes.
How should this medicine be used?
Semaglutide injection comes as a solution (liquid) in a prefilled dosing pen to inject subcutaneously (under the skin). It is injected once a week with or without food. Use semaglutide injection on the same day each week at any time of day. You may change the day of the week that you use semaglutide as long as it has been 2 or more days since you used your last dose.
Use semaglutide injection exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of semaglutide injection and increase your dose after 4 weeks. Your doctor may increase your dose again after another 4 weeks based on your body's response to the medication.
Semaglutide injection helps to control diabetes and weight loss, but does not cure it. Continue to use semaglutide injection even if you feel well. Do not stop using semaglutide injection without talking to your doctor.
You will be shown how to use the injection pen by your doctor or nurse. You will also be given instructions for use with the medicine. This will tell you how to inject it. Read it carefully. Ask your pharmacist or doctor if you have any questions about how to inject this medication.
Always look at the semaglutide solution before you inject it. It should be clear, colorless, and free of particles. Do not use semaglutide if it is colored, cloudy, thickened, or contains solid particles, or if the expiration date on the pen has passed.
Never reuse needles and never share needles or pens. Always remove the needle right after you inject your dose. Dispose of needles in a puncture-resistant container. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to dispose of the puncture resistant container.
Inject semaglutide in your upper arm, thigh, or stomach area. Use a different site for each injection.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using semaglutide injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking semaglutide. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas); depression, thought about or attempted suicide, or changes in behavior; diabetic retinopathy (damage to the eyes caused by diabetes); severe stomach problems, including gastroparesis (slowed movement of food from the stomach to the small intestine) or problems digesting food; gallbladder disease; or kidney disease. Also tell your doctor if you have recently had diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting or if you cannot drink liquids by mouth, which may cause dehydration (loss of a large amount of body fluids).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking semaglutide injection, call your doctor immediately. tell your doctor if you plan to become pregnant. Your doctor will tell you to stop using semaglutide injection for 2 months before a planned pregnancy.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using semaglutide injection.
ask your doctor what to do if there is a large change in your diet, exercise, or weight; or if you get sick, develop an infection or fever, experience unusual stress, or are injured. These changes and conditions can affect your blood sugar and the amount of semaglutide injection you may need.This medication may cause changes in your blood sugar. Signs and symptoms of low blood sugar may include dizziness or lightheadedness, irritability, sweating, hunger, drowsiness, shakiness, weakness, headache, slurred speech, blurred vision, fast heart rate and feeling jittery. You should know the symptoms of low blood sugar and what to do if you have these symptoms.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Be sure to follow all exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Inject the missed dose as soon as you remember it within 5 days after the missed dose. However, if more than 5 days have passed, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Semaglutide injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
stomach pain
constipation
heartburn, burping
runny nose or sore throat
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNINGS section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
ongoing pain that begins in the upper left or middle of the stomach but may spread to the back, with or without vomiting
new or worsening depression, unusual changes in mood or behavior, or thinking about harming or killing yourself
rash; itching; fainting or dizziness; swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, tongue, or throat; or difficulty breathing or swallowing
decreased urination; or swelling of legs, ankles, or feet
vision changes
pain in upper stomach; yellowing of skin or eyes; fever; or clay-colored stools
rapid or pounding heartbeat
severe stomach problems
Semaglutide injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in and out of reach of children. Store it away from light and heat, with the pen cap on.
Store semaglutide pens in the refrigerator (36°F to 46°F [2°C to 8°C]). Do not freeze. Semaglutide pens may also be stored at room temperature for certain amount of time. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how long you can store semaglutide pens at room temperature.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach
https://www.upandaway.org
.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body’s response to semaglutide.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ozempic
®
Wegovy
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page