Teduglutide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Teduglutide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613019.html
Teduglutide Injection
pronounced as (te'' due gloo' tide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Teduglutide injection is used to treat short bowel syndrome in people who need additional nutrition or fluids from intravenous (IV) therapy. Teduglutide injection is in a class of medications called glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2) analogs. It works by improving the absorption of fluids and nutrients in the intestines.
How should this medicine be used?
Teduglutide comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected subcutaneously (under the skin). It is usually injected once a day. Inject teduglutide at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Inject teduglutide exactly as directed. Do not inject more or less of it or inject it more often than prescribed by your doctor. If you inject more teduglutide than prescribed by your doctor, call your doctor right away.
Continue to use teduglutide even if you feel well. Do not stop using teduglutide without talking to your doctor.
You may inject teduglutide yourself or have a friend or relative give the injections. You and the person who will be injecting the medication should read the manufacturer's directions for mixing and injecting the medication before you use it for the first time at home. Ask your doctor to show you or the person who will be injecting teduglutide how to mix and inject it.
Teduglutide comes as a kit containing vials of teduglutide powder for injection, prefilled syringes containing diluent (liquid to be mixed with teduglutide powder), needles to attach to the diluent syringe, dosing syringes with needles attached, and alcohol swab pads. Dispose of needles, syringes, and vials in a puncture-resistant container after you use them once. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
Always look at your teduglutide injection before you inject it. The solution should be clear and colorless or pale yellow, with no particles in it. Teduglutide must be used within 3 hours after mixing teduglutide powder with the diluent.
You can inject your teduglutide in your upper arm, thigh, or stomach. Never inject teduglutide into a vein or muscle. Use a different injection site each day. Do not inject teduglutide into any area that is tender, bruised, red, or hard.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with teduglutide injection and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before injecting teduglutide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to teduglutide, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in teduglutide injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving teduglutide injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have a stoma (a surgically created opening from an area inside the body to the outside, usually in the abdominal area) or if you have or have ever had cancer, polyps in your intestines or rectum, high blood pressure, or gallbladder, heart, kidney, or pancreatic disease.
you should know that teduglutide injection may cause polyps (growths) in the colon (large intestine). Your doctor will check your colon within 6 months before you start using teduglutide, again right after you have used this medication for 1 year, and then at least once every 5 years. If polyps are found, they will need to be removed. If cancer is found in a polyp, your doctor may tell you to stop using teduglutide injection.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking teduglutide, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Inject the missed dose as soon as you remember it that day. Inject the next dose the next day at the same time you normally inject it every day. Do not inject two doses on the same day.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Teduglutide injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
skin problems at the site of injection
hives
rash
itching
red spots on the skin
headache
gas
changes in appetite
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
runny nose
sneezing
cough
flu-like symptoms
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
pain, swelling, or tenderness in the abdomen (stomach area)
swelling and blockage at the stoma opening (in patients who have a stoma)
fever
chills
change in your stools
difficulty having a bowel movement or passing gas
nausea
vomiting
dark urine
yellowing of the skin or eyes
swelling of the feet or ankles
rapid weight gain
difficulty breathing
Teduglutide injection may make abnormal cells in your body grow faster and therefore increase your risk of developing cancer. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Teduglutide injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze teduglutide. Use the teduglutide powder for injection by the expiration date on the ''Use By'' sticker on the kit.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain procedures and lab tests to check your body's response to teduglutide injection.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Gattex
®
Last Revised -
01/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page