Arformoterol Oral Inhalation: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Arformoterol Oral Inhalation
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a607061.html
Arformoterol Oral Inhalation
pronounced as (ar'' for moe' ter ol)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Arformoterol inhalation is used to control wheezing, shortness of breath, coughing, and chest tightness caused by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; a group of lung diseases, which includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema). Arformoterol is in a class of medications called long-acting beta agonists (LABAs). It works by relaxing and opening air passages in the lungs, making it easier to breathe.
How should this medicine be used?
Arformoterol comes as a solution (liquid) to inhale by mouth using a nebulizer (machine that turns medication into a mist that can be inhaled). It is usually inhaled twice a day in the morning and the evening. Inhale arformoterol at around the same times every day, and space your doses about 12 hours apart. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use arformoterol exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Do not swallow or inject arformoterol inhalation.
Do not use arformoterol inhalation to treat sudden attacks of COPD. Your doctor will prescribe a short-acting beta agonist medication such as albuterol (Accuneb, Proair, Proventil, Ventolin) to use during attacks. If you were using this type of medication on a regular basis before you began treatment with arformoterol, your doctor will probably tell you to stop using it regularly, but to continue to use it to treat attacks.
If your COPD symptoms become worse, if arformoterol inhalation becomes less effective, if you need more doses than usual of the medication you use to treat sudden attacks, or if the medication you use to treat attacks does not relieve your symptoms, your condition may be getting worse. Do not use extra doses of arformoterol. Call your doctor right away.
Arformoterol controls the symptoms of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease but does not cure the condition. Continue to use arformoterol even if you feel well. Do not stop using arformoterol without talking to your doctor. If you suddenly stop using arformoterol, your symptoms may worsen.
To use arformoterol inhalation, follow these steps:
Open the foil pouch by tearing through the rough edge along the edge of the pouch and remove the vial. Look at the solution in the vial to be sure it is colorless. If it is not colorless, call your doctor or pharmacist and do not use the solution.
Twist off the top of the vial and squeeze all of the liquid into the reservoir of your nebulizer. Do not add any other medications to the nebulizer because it may not be safe to mix them with arformoterol. Use all nebulized medications separately unless your doctor specifically tells you to mix them.
Connect the nebulizer reservoir to your mouthpiece or facemask.
Connect the nebulizer to the compressor.
Sit upright and place the mouthpiece in your mouth or put on the facemask.
Turn on the compressor.
Breathe calmly, deeply, and evenly until mist stops forming in the nebulizer. This should take between 5 and 10 minutes.
Clean the nebulizer according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using arformoterol inhalation,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to arformoterol, formoterol (Perforomist, in Bevespi, Dulera, Symbicort), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in arformoterol solution. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Some medications should not be taken with arformoterol inhalation. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with arformoterol inhalation. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before using arformoterol inhalation with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using arformoterol inhalation, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist..
The following nonprescription products may interact with arformoterol inhalation: medications for colds such as phenylephrine (Sudafed PE), and pseudophedrine (Sudafed). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start using arformoterol inhalation. Do not start any of these medications while using arformoterol inhalation without discussing with your healthcare provider..
tell your doctor if you have asthma. Your doctor will tell you not to use arformoterol unless you are using it along with an inhaled steroid medication.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an irregular heartbeat; QT prolongation (an irregular heart rhythm that can lead to fainting, loss of consciousness, seizures, or sudden death); high blood pressure; seizures; diabetes; or heart, liver, or thyroid disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using arformoterol, call your doctor.
you should know that arformoterol inhalation sometimes causes wheezing and difficulty breathing immediately after it is inhaled. If this happens, call your doctor right away. Do not use arformoterol inhalation again unless your doctor tells you that you should.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not inhale a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Arformoterol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nervousness
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
headache
dizziness
tiredness
lack of energy
not feeling well
flu symptoms
swelling of arms or legs
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
pain, especially back pain
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
cramps
dry mouth
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fast or pounding heartbeat
chest pain
hives
rash
swelling of the eyes, face, tongue, lips, mouth, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
increased difficulty breathing or swallowing
Arformoterol may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the foil pouch it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Protect the medication from heat and light. You may store the medication in the refrigerator until the expiration date printed on the package has passed, or you may store the medication at room temperature for up to 6 weeks. Dispose of any medication that has been stored at room temperature for longer than 6 weeks, or that has been removed from the foil pouch and not used immediately.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
chest pain
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
nervousness
headache
uncontrollable shaking of a part of the body
dry mouth
muscle cramps
nausea
dizziness
excessive tiredness
weakness
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Before having any laboratory test (especially those that involve methylene blue), tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using arformoterol.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Brovana
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page