Auranofin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Auranofin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a685038.html
Auranofin
pronounced as (au rane' oh fin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Auranofin is used, with rest and nondrug therapy, to treat rheumatoid arthritis. It improves arthritis symptoms including painful or tender and swollen joints and morning stiffness.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Auranofin comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It usually is taken once or twice a day. It must be taken on a regular schedule, as prescribed by your doctor, to be effective. The full effect of this drug usually is not felt for 3-4 months; in some people, it may take up to 6 months. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take auranofin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Auranofin is also used sometimes for psoriatic arthritis. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this drug for your condition.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking auranofin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to auranofin or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications you are taking, especially arthritis medications, phenytoin (Dilantin), and vitamins.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had heart, kidney, or liver disease; diabetes; bleeding problems; inflammatory bowel disease; colitis; rash; eczema; SLE (systemic lupus erythematosus); or a history of bone marrow depression.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking auranofin, call your doctor. You should not try to become pregnant while taking auranofin or for at least 6 months after discontinuing the drug because it stays in the body for a long time.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking auranofin.
be aware that you should not drink alcohol while taking this medication.
plan to avoid unneccessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing and sunscreen. Auranofin may make your skin more sensitive to sunlight.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Auranofin may cause an upset stomach. Take auranofin after meals or a light snack.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it, and take any remaining doses for that day at evenly spaced intervals. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Auranofin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
metallic taste
loose stools or diarrhea
stomach pain
upset stomach
vomiting
gas
hair loss
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
bloody or tarry stools
itching
skin rash
sore throat
mouth sores
fever
chills
unusual bruising or bleeding
blood in the urine
fatigue
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to auranofin.
If you have a tuberculin (TB) skin test, tell the person performing the test that you take auranofin.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ridaura
®
Last Revised -
10/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page