Berdazimer Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Berdazimer Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624007.html
Berdazimer Topical
pronounced as (ber daz′ i mer soe′ dee um)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Berdazimer topical is used to treat molluscum contagiosum (MC; infection caused by a virus that causes little bumps to form on skin anywhere on the body) in adults and children over the age of 1 year. Berdazimer is in a class of medications called nitric oxide releasing agents. How it works to treat MC is not fully understood.
How should this medicine be used?
Berdazimer comes as a gel to be applied to the affected areas of the skin. It is usually applied to each MC skin lesions once daily for up to 12 weeks. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use berdazimer exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Berdazimer comes as two tubes and a dosing guide. Squeeze out an equal amount from each tube onto the dosing guide. Follow the directions on the dosing guide for how much berdazimer to apply to the dosing guide. Replace the caps on both tubes tightly and mix together on the dosing guide. Apply berdazimer as a thin layer on all MC lesions. Wash hands (unless treating lesions on hands) and avoid touching eyes or transferring gel to unaffected parts of the body. Allow berdazimer to dry for 10 minutes and avoid swimming, bathing or washing for 1 hour after applying.
Do not apply berdazimer in or around the eyes or place in the mouth or vagina.
Only mix berdazimer right before applying. Discard any unused mixed berdazimer. Do not store for later use.
Take berdazimer for as long as instructed to by your physician to ensure complete clearance of lesions.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using berdazimer,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to berdazimer, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in berdazimer topical gel. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had skin problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using berdazimer, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra gel to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Berdazimer may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning, stinging, flaky skin
lightening or darkening of the skin
blisters or irritation
fever, general unwell feeling, cough, or congestion
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
pain, itching, swelling or redness at application site
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Discard unused portion after 60 days.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
If someone swallows berdazimer, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Zelsumvi
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page