Otulipenia: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Otulipenia
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/otulipenia/
Otulipenia
Description
Otulipenia is characterized by abnormal inflammation throughout the body. Inflammation is a normal immune system response to injury and foreign invaders (such as bacteria). However, the uncontrolled inflammation that occurs in otulipenia can damage many of the body's tissues and organs, including the gastrointestinal system, joints, and skin. Disorders such as otulipenia that result from abnormally increased inflammation are known as autoinflammatory diseases.
Signs and symptoms of otulipenia usually begin within the first few weeks of life, with recurring episodes of fever; diarrhea; painful, swollen joints; and skin rashes. The skin rashes are due to inflammation of the layer of
fatty tissue under the skin
(panniculitis), which causes painful red bumps. Some people with otulipenia have an abnormal distribution of fatty tissue in their bodies (lipodystrophy). Affected infants have difficulty growing and gaining weight at the expected rate (failure to thrive). Damage to the body's tissues and organs caused by inflammation is life-threatening if the condition is not treated.
Frequency
The prevalence of otulipenia is not known. At least four cases have been reported in the medical literature.
Causes
Otulipenia is caused by mutations in the
OTULIN
gene. The protein produced from this gene helps control inflammation. Inflammation can be turned on by a cellular process called ubiquitination, in which molecules called ubiquitin are attached to certain proteins. In particular, signaling pathways that lead to inflammation are stimulated by the attachment of chains of ubiquitin molecules linked end-to-end (linear ubiquitin chains). The OTULIN protein helps control inflammation by removing these linear ubiquitin chains.
OTULIN
gene mutations that cause otulipenia lead to production of an OTULIN protein with reduced function. As a result, removal of linear ubiquitin chains is impaired, and signaling pathways that cause inflammation are abnormally active. The excessive inflammation that results causes fever, diarrhea, panniculitis, and the other signs and symptoms of otulipenia.
Learn more about the gene associated with Otulipenia
OTULIN
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
AIPDS
Autoinflammation, panniculitis, and dermatosis syndrome
ORAS
OTULIN-related autoinflammatory syndrome
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Autoinflammation, panniculitis, and dermatosis syndrome, autosomal recessive
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Infantile-onset periodic fever-panniculitis-dermatosis syndrome
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
AUTOINFLAMMATION, PANNICULITIS, AND DERMATOSIS SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE; AIPDSB
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Damgaard RB, Walker JA, Marco-Casanova P, Morgan NV, Titheradge HL, Elliott
PR, McHale D, Maher ER, McKenzie ANJ, Komander D. The Deubiquitinase OTULIN Is an
Essential Negative Regulator of Inflammation and Autoimmunity. Cell. 2016 Aug
25;166(5):1215-1230.e20. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.07.019. Epub 2016 Aug 11.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Elliott PR, Komander D. Regulation of Met1-linked polyubiquitin signalling by
the deubiquitinase OTULIN. FEBS J. 2016 Jan;283(1):39-53. doi:
10.1111/febs.13547. Epub 2015 Nov 2.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Keusekotten K, Elliott PR, Glockner L, Fiil BK, Damgaard RB, Kulathu Y, Wauer
T, Hospenthal MK, Gyrd-Hansen M, Krappmann D, Hofmann K, Komander D. OTULIN
antagonizes LUBAC signaling by specifically hydrolyzing Met1-linked
polyubiquitin. Cell. 2013 Jun 6;153(6):1312-26. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.014.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Zhou Q, Yu X, Demirkaya E, Deuitch N, Stone D, Tsai WL, Kuehn HS, Wang H, Yang
D, Park YH, Ombrello AK, Blake M, Romeo T, Remmers EF, Chae JJ, Mullikin JC,
Guzel F, Milner JD, Boehm M, Rosenzweig SD, Gadina M, Welch SB, Ozen S, Topaloglu
R, Abinun M, Kastner DL, Aksentijevich I. Biallelic hypomorphic mutations in a
linear deubiquitinase define otulipenia, an early-onset autoinflammatory disease.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Sep 6;113(36):10127-32. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1612594113. Epub 2016 Aug 24.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Autoimmune Diseases
Genetic Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Immune response
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page