Dent disease: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Dent disease
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/dent-disease/
Dent disease
Description
Dent disease is a chronic kidney disorder that occurs almost exclusively in males. In affected individuals, kidney problems result from damage to structures called proximal tubules. Signs and symptoms of this condition appear in early childhood and worsen over time.
The most frequent sign of Dent disease is the presence of an abnormally large amount of proteins in the urine (tubular proteinuria). Other common signs of the disorder include excess calcium in the urine (hypercalciuria), calcium deposits in the kidneys (nephrocalcinosis), and
kidney stones
(nephrolithiasis). Kidney stones can cause abdominal pain and blood in the urine (hematuria). In most affected males, progressive kidney problems lead to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) in early to mid-adulthood. ESRD is a life-threatening failure of kidney function that occurs when the kidneys are no longer able to filter fluids and waste products from the body effectively.
Some people with Dent disease develop
rickets
, a bone disorder that results when the levels of vitamin D and certain minerals (including calcium) in the blood become too low. Rickets can be associated with weakening and softening of the bones, bone pain, bowed legs, and difficulty walking.
Researchers have described two forms of Dent disease, which are distinguished by their genetic cause and pattern of signs and symptoms. Both forms of Dent disease (type 1 and type 2) are characterized by the features described above, but Dent disease 2 can also be associated with abnormalities unrelated to kidney function. These additional signs and symptoms include mild intellectual disability, weak muscle tone (hypotonia), and clouding of the lens of the eyes (
cataract
) that is described as subclinical because it does not impair vision. Some researchers consider Dent disease 2 to be a mild variant of a similar disorder called
Lowe syndrome
.
Frequency
Dent disease is a rare condition, with about 250 affected families reported. Dent disease 1 is more common than Dent disease 2.
Dent disease is likely underdiagnosed because it may not be identified in people with mild signs and symptoms, and because its features overlap with those of other kidney disorders.
Causes
Dent disease can result from mutations in the
CLCN5
or
OCRL
gene. Mutations in the
CLCN5
gene cause Dent disease 1, which accounts for about 60 percent of all cases of Dent disease. Mutations in the
OCRL
gene cause Dent disease 2, which accounts for about 15 percent of all cases. In the remaining 25 percent of cases, the genetic cause of the disorder is unknown.
The proteins produced from the
CLCN5
and
OCRL
genes play critical roles in
normal kidney function
, particularly the function of the proximal tubules. These structures help to reabsorb nutrients, water, and other materials that have been filtered from the bloodstream. The kidneys reabsorb needed materials into the blood and excrete everything else into the urine. Studies suggest that mutations in the
CLCN5
or
OCRL
gene disrupt the reabsorption function of the proximal tubules, which leads to the progressive kidney problems found in people with Dent disease.
Because the
OCRL
gene is active (expressed) throughout the body, it is unclear why Dent disease 2 primarily affects the kidneys and, to a lesser extent, the brain, eyes, and other tissues.
Learn more about the genes associated with Dent disease
CLCN5
OCRL
Inheritance
Dent disease is inherited in an
X-linked recessive pattern
. The
CLCN5
and
OCRL
genes are located on the X chromosome, which is one of the two sex chromosomes. In males (who have only one X chromosome), one altered copy of a gene in each cell is sufficient to cause the condition. In females (who have two X chromosomes), a mutation would have to occur in both copies of the gene to cause the disorder. Because it is unlikely that females will have two altered copies of this gene, males are affected by X-linked recessive disorders much more frequently than females. A characteristic of X-linked inheritance is that fathers cannot pass X-linked traits to their sons.
In X-linked recessive inheritance, a female with one mutated copy of the gene in each cell is called a carrier. She can pass on the altered gene but usually does not experience signs and symptoms of the disorder. However, some females who carry a mutation in the
CLCN5
or
OCRL
gene have mild features of Dent disease, including proteinuria and hypercalciuria. Severe kidney problems, including ESRD, are rare in female carriers.
Other Names for This Condition
Dent's disease
Dents disease
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Dent disease type 1
Genetic Testing Registry: Dent disease type 2
Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center
Dent disease
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Clinical Trials
ClinicalTrials.gov
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
DENT DISEASE 1; DENT1
DENT DISEASE 2; DENT2
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Claverie-Martin F, Ramos-Trujillo E, Garcia-Nieto V. Dent's disease: clinical
features and molecular basis. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011 May;26(5):693-704. doi:
10.1007/s00467-010-1657-0. Epub 2010 Oct 10.
Citation on PubMed
Devuyst O, Thakker RV. Dent's disease. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2010 Oct 14;5:28.
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-28.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Devuyst O. Dent's disease: chloride-proton exchange controls proximal tubule
endocytosis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010 Dec;25(12):3832-5. doi:
10.1093/ndt/gfq556. Epub 2010 Sep 6. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Hichri H, Rendu J, Monnier N, Coutton C, Dorseuil O, Poussou RV, Baujat G,
Blanchard A, Nobili F, Ranchin B, Remesy M, Salomon R, Satre V, Lunardi J. From
Lowe syndrome to Dent disease: correlations between mutations of the OCRL1 gene
and clinical and biochemical phenotypes. Hum Mutat. 2011 Apr;32(4):379-88. doi:
10.1002/humu.21391. Epub 2011 Mar 10.
Citation on PubMed
Hoopes RR Jr, Shrimpton AE, Knohl SJ, Hueber P, Hoppe B, Matyus J, Simckes A,
Tasic V, Toenshoff B, Suchy SF, Nussbaum RL, Scheinman SJ. Dent Disease with
mutations in OCRL1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Feb;76(2):260-7. doi: 10.1086/427887.
Epub 2004 Dec 30.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Lloyd SE, Gunther W, Pearce SH, Thomson A, Bianchi ML, Bosio M, Craig IW,
Fisher SE, Scheinman SJ, Wrong O, Jentsch TJ, Thakker RV. Characterisation of
renal chloride channel, CLCN5, mutations in hypercalciuric nephrolithiasis
(kidney stones) disorders. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Aug;6(8):1233-9. doi:
10.1093/hmg/6.8.1233.
Citation on PubMed
Ludwig M, Utsch B, Monnens LA. Recent advances in understanding the clinical
and genetic heterogeneity of Dent's disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2006
Oct;21(10):2708-17. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfl346. Epub 2006 Jul 20. No abstract
available.
Citation on PubMed
Wrong OM, Norden AG, Feest TG. Dent's disease; a familial proximal renal
tubular syndrome with low-molecular-weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria,
nephrocalcinosis, metabolic bone disease, progressive renal failure and a marked
male predominance. QJM. 1994 Aug;87(8):473-93.
Citation on PubMed
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Kidney Diseases
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
End-stage kidney disease
Genetics
Kidney stones
Nephrocalcinosis
Rickets
Urine protein dipstick test
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page