Belantamab Mafodotin-blmf Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Belantamab Mafodotin-blmf Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620052.html
Belantamab Mafodotin-blmf Injection
pronounced as (bel an' ta mab) (ma" foe doe' tin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Belantamab mafodotin-blmf injection may cause serious eye or vision problems, including vision loss. Tell your doctor if you have or have a history of vision or eye problems. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: blurred vision, vision changes or loss, or dry eyes.
Because of the risk of vision problems with this medication, belantamab mafodotin-blmf is only available through a special program called Blenrep REMS
®
. You, your doctor, and your healthcare facility must be enrolled in this program before you can receive belantamab mafodotin-blmf. Ask your doctor for more information about this program.
Do not wear contact lenses during treatment unless directed by a doctor or eye doctor. Use a preservative-free lubricant eye drop as directed by your doctor during your treatment.
Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects your vision.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before and during your treatment. Your doctor will order an eye exam before and several times during your treatment, especially if you notice a change in vision.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with belantamab mafodotin-blmf and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) or the manufacturer's website to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving belantamab mafodotin-blmf.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Belantamab mafodotin-blmf injection is used to treat multiple myeloma (a type of cancer of the bone marrow) that has returned or has not improved in adults who have received at least 4 other medications. Belantamab mafodotin-blmf is in a class of medications called antibody-drug conjugates. It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Belantamab mafodotin-blmf comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected intravenously (into a vein) over 30 minutes by a doctor or nurse in a hospital or medical facility. It is usually given once every 3 weeks. The cycle may be repeated as recommended by your doctor. The length of your treatment depends on how well your body responds to the medication and any side effects that you experience.
A doctor or nurse will watch you closely while you are receiving the medication to be sure you are not having a serious reaction to the medication. Tell your doctor or nurse immediately if you experience any of the following symptoms: chills; flushing; itching or rash; shortness of breath, cough, or wheezing; tiredness; fever; dizziness or lightheadedness; or swelling of your lips, tongue, throat, or face.
Your doctor may reduce your dose or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with belantamab mafodotin-blmf.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving belantamab mafodotin-blmf injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to belantamab mafodotin-blmf, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in belantamab mafodotin-blmf injection. Ask your pharmacist or check the Medication Guide for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had bleeding problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or plan to father a child. You should not start receiving belantamab mafodotin-blmf injection until a pregnancy test has shown that you are not pregnant. If you are a woman who is able to become pregnant, you must use effective birth control during your treatment and for 4 months after your final dose. If you are male with a female partner who could become pregnant, you must use effective birth control during your treatment and for 6 months after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about methods of birth control that will work for you. If you or your partner become pregnant while receiving belantamab mafodotin-blmf injection, call your doctor. Belantamab mafodotin-blmf injection may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Do not breastfeed during your treatment and for 3 months after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may decrease fertility in men and women. Talk to your doctor about the risks of receiving belantamab mafodotin-blmf injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of belantamab mafodotin-blmf, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Belantamab mafodotin-blmf may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
constipation
diarrhea
loss of appetite
joint or back pain
tiredness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
unusual bleeding or bruising
shortness of breath, chest pain, cough
Belantamab mafodotin-blmf may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about belantamab mafodotin-blmf.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Blenrep
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page