Nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 10: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
Nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 10
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/nonsyndromic-congenital-nail-disorder-10/
Nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 10
Description
Nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 10 is a condition that affects the fingernails and toenails. Affected individuals have extremely thick nails (onychauxis) that separate from the underlying nail bed (onycholysis) and can appear claw-like. Some fingers and toes may be missing part of the nail (hyponychia).
In affected individuals, the nails are often abnormal from birth. However, the abnormalities may not be noticeable until later in childhood because the nails tend to grow more slowly than normal.
Individuals with nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 10 do not have any other health problems related to the condition.
Frequency
Nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 10 is likely a rare disorder. At least 14 affected individuals have been described in the scientific literature.
Causes
Nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 10 is caused by mutations in the
FZD6
gene, which provides instructions for making a protein called frizzled-6. This protein is embedded in the outer membrane of many types of cells, where it is involved in transmitting chemical signals from outside the cell to the cell's nucleus. The frizzled-6 protein plays an especially critical role in the growth and development of nails, particularly the attachment of the nail to the nail bed.
FZD6
gene mutations that cause nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 10 lead to the production of a frizzled-6 protein that cannot get to the cell membrane where it is needed or that cannot transmit signals into the cell. As a result, the growth and development of nails is poorly regulated, which leads to onycholysis and other abnormalities of the fingernails and toenails.
Learn more about the gene associated with Nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 10
FZD6
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Claw-shaped nails
Nail disorder, nonsyndromic congenital, 10
NDNC10
Onychauxis, hyponychia, and onycholysis
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Nonsyndromic congenital nail disorder 1
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
NAIL DISORDER, NONSYNDROMIC CONGENITAL, 1; NDNC1
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Frojmark AS, Schuster J, Sobol M, Entesarian M, Kilander MBC, Gabrikova D,
Nawaz S, Baig SM, Schulte G, Klar J, Dahl N. Mutations in Frizzled 6 cause
isolated autosomal-recessive nail dysplasia. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jun
10;88(6):852-860. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.05.013.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Naz G, Pasternack SM, Perrin C, Mattheisen M, Refke M, Khan S, Gul A, Simons
M, Ahmad W, Betz RC. FZD6 encoding the Wnt receptor frizzled 6 is mutated in
autosomal-recessive nail dysplasia. Br J Dermatol. 2012 May;166(5):1088-94. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10800.x. Epub 2012 Apr 4.
Citation on PubMed
Raza SI, Muhammad N, Khan S, Ahmad W. A novel missense mutation in the gene
FZD6 underlies autosomal recessive nail dysplasia. Br J Dermatol. 2013
Feb;168(2):422-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11203.x. Epub 2012 Oct 5.
Citation on PubMed
Enlarge image
Related Health Topics
Genetic Disorders
Nail Diseases
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Genetics
Nail abnormalities
Onycholysis (Image)
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page