Fluticasone and Salmeterol Oral Inhalation: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Fluticasone and Salmeterol Oral Inhalation
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a699063.html
Fluticasone and Salmeterol Oral Inhalation
pronounced as (floo tik' a sone) (sal me' te role)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of fluticasone and salmeterol (Advair Diskus, Advair HFA, AirDuo Respiclick) is used to treat difficulty breathing, wheezing, shortness of breath, coughing, and chest tightness caused by asthma. The combination of fluticasone and salmeterol (Advair Diskus) is also used to prevent and treat wheezing, shortness of breath, coughing, and chest tightness caused by chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; a group of lung diseases that includes chronic bronchitis and emphysema). The combination of fluticasone and salmeterol (Advair Diskus) is used in adults and children 4 years of age and older. The combination of fluticasone and salmeterol (Advair HFA, AirDuo Respiclick) is used in children 12 years of age and older. Fluticasone is in a class of medications called steroids. It works by reducing swelling in the airways. Salmeterol is in a class of medications called long-acting beta-agonists (LABAs). It works by relaxing and opening air passages in the lungs, making it easier to breathe.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of fluticasone and salmeterol comes as a powder and as an inhalation solution to inhale by mouth using a specially designed inhaler. It is usually used twice a day, in the morning and evening, about 12 hours apart. Use fluticasone and salmeterol at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use fluticasone and salmeterol exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Talk to your doctor about how you should take your other oral or inhaled medications for asthma during your treatment with salmeterol and fluticasone inhalation. If you were using a short-acting beta agonist inhaler such as albuterol (Proventil, Ventolin) on a regular basis, your doctor will probably tell you to stop using it regularly but to continue to use it to treat sudden attacks of asthma symptoms. Follow these directions carefully. Do not change the way you use any of your medications or stop taking any of your medications without talking to your doctor.
Do not use fluticasone and salmeterol during an attack of asthma or COPD. Your doctor will prescribe a short-acting inhaler to use during attacks.
Fluticasone and salmeterol inhalation controls the symptoms of certain lung diseases but does not cure these conditions. It may take a week or longer before you feel the full benefit of fluticasone and salmeterol. Continue to use fluticasone and salmeterol even if you feel well. Do not stop using fluticasone and salmeterol without talking to your doctor. If you stop using fluticasone and salmeterol inhalation, your symptoms may return.
Before you use fluticasone and salmeterol inhalation (Advair Diskus, Advair HFA, or AirDuo Respiclick) for the first time, read the written package instructions that come with it. Look at the diagrams and package instructions carefully and be sure that you recognize all the parts of the inhaler. Ask your doctor, pharmacist, or respiratory therapist to show you how to use the inhaler. Practice using your inhaler while they watch, so you are sure you are doing it the right way.
If your child will be using fluticasone and salmeterol inhalation, be sure that he or she knows how to use it. Watch your child each time they use the inhaler to be sure that they are using it correctly.
Never exhale into the inhaler, take the inhaler apart, or wash the mouthpiece or any part of the inhaler. Keep the inhaler dry. Do not use the inhaler with a spacer.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the fluticasone and salmeterol inhalation (Advair Diskus, Advair HFA, or AirDuo Respiclick) manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using fluticasone and salmeterol oral inhalation,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to fluticasone (Flonase, Flovent), salmeterol (Serevent), any other medications, milk protein, any foods, or any of the ingredients in fluticasone and salmeterol oral inhalation. Ask your pharmacist or check the Patient Information for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you use another LABA such as formoterol (Perforomist, in Dulera, in Symbicort) or salmeterol (Serevent, in Advair). These medications should not be used with fluticasone and salmeterol inhalation. Your doctor will tell you which medication you should use and which medication you should stop using.
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking the following medications or have stopped taking them within the past two weeks: antidepressants such as amitriptyline, amoxapine, clomipramine (Anafranil), desipramine (Norpramin), doxepin (Silenor), imipramine (Tofranil), nortriptyline (Pamelor), protriptyline (Vivactil), and trimipramine (Surmontil); and monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors, including isocarboxazid (Marplan), linezolid (Zyvox), methylene blue, phenelzine (Nardil), selegiline (Eldepryl, Emsam, Zelapar), and tranylcypromine (Parnate).
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking while using fluticasone and salmeterol oral inhalation. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had osteoporosis (a condition in which the bones become weak and fragile), and if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, irregular heartbeat, seizures, hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid), diabetes, tuberculosis (TB), cataracts (clouding of the lens of the eye), glaucoma (an eye disease), any condition that affects your immune system, or liver or heart disease. Also tell your doctor if you have a herpes eye infection or any other type of infection and if you smoke or use tobacco products.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using fluticasone and salmeterol, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell your doctor or dentist that you are using fluticasone and salmeterol.
tell your doctor if you have never had chickenpox or measles and have not been vaccinated against these infections. Stay away from people who are sick, especially people who have chickenpox or measles. If you are exposed to these infections or if you develop symptoms of these infections, call your doctor immediately. You may need to get a vaccine (shot) to protect you from these infections.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit or drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not inhale a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Fluticasone and salmeterol may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
runny nose
sneezing
sore throat
throat irritation
sinus pain
headache
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
stomach pain
muscle and bone pain
dizziness
weakness
tiredness
sweating
tooth pain
shaking of a part of your body that you cannot control
sleep problems
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following side effects, call your doctor immediately:
coughing, wheezing, or chest tightness that begins soon after you inhale fluticasone and salmeterol
hives
rash
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
choking or difficulty swallowing
hoarseness
noisy, high-pitched breathing
pounding fast, or irregular heartbeat
fainting
chest pain
cough
burning or tingling in the hands or feet
white patches in the mouth
fever, chills, and other signs of infection
Fluticasone and salmeterol may cause children to grow more slowly. Your child's doctor will monitor your child's growth carefully. Talk to your child's doctor about the risks of giving this medication to your child.
Fluticasone and salmeterol may increase the risk that you will develop glaucoma or cataracts. You will probably need to have regular eye exams during your treatment with fluticasone and salmeterol. Tell your doctor if you have any of the following: pain, redness, or discomfort of the eyes; blurred vision;seeing halos or bright colors around lights; or any other changes in vision. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication.
Fluticasone and salmeterol may increase your risk of developing osteoporosis. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication.
Fluticasone and salmeterol may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from sunlight, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Talk to your pharmacist about the proper disposal of your medication.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
seizures
chest pain
dizziness
fainting
blurred vision
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
nervousness
headache
shaking of a part of your body that you cannot control
muscle cramps or weakness
dry mouth
nausea
excessive tiredness
lack of energy
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and your eye doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Advair
®
Diskus
Advair
®
HFA
AirDuo
®
Respiclick
Last Revised -
04/15/2019
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page