Neomycin, Polymyxin, and Hydrocortisone Otic: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Neomycin, Polymyxin, and Hydrocortisone Otic
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618031.html
Neomycin, Polymyxin, and Hydrocortisone Otic
pronounced as (nee" oh mye' sin)(pol" ee mix' in)(hye" droe kor' ti sone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination is used to treat outer ear infections caused by certain bacteria. It is also used to treat outer ear infections that can occur after certain types of ear surgery. Neomycin and polymyxin are in a class of medications called antibiotics. They work by stopping the growth of bacteria. Hydrocortisone is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by activating natural substances in the ear to reduce swelling, redness, and itching.
How should this medicine be used?
Neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination comes as a solution (liquid) and a suspension (liquid with undissolved particles) to instill in the ear. It is usually used in the affected ear(s) three to four times a day for up to 10 days. Use neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination is only for use in the ears. Do not use in the eyes.
Your symptoms should begin to improve during the first few days of treatment with neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination. If your symptoms do not improve after one week or get worse, call your doctor.
To use the eardrops, follow these steps:
Hold the bottle in your hand for 1 or 2 minutes to warm the solution.
If you are using the suspension, shake the bottle well.
Clean and dry the affected ear canal thoroughly with a sterile cotton applicator.
Lie down with the affected ear upward.
Place the prescribed number of drops into your ear.
Be careful not to touch the dropper tip to your ear, fingers, or any other surface.
Remain lying down with the affected ear upward for 5 minutes.
Repeat steps 1-6 for the opposite ear if necessary.If you prefer, you may place a cotton wick into the ear canal, and then the cotton may be saturated with the ear drops. The wick should be replaced at least once every 24 hours.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to neomycin (Neo-Fradin
®
, Mycifradin
®
, others); polymyxin; hydrocortisone (Anusol HC
®
, Cortef
®
, others); aminoglycoside antibiotics such as amikacin, gentamicin (Gentak
®
, Genoptic
®
), kanamycin, paromomycin, streptomycin, and tobramycin (Tobrex
®
, Tobi
®
); sulfites; any other medications; or any of the ingredients in neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone solution or suspension. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have a hole or tear in your ear drum or if you have an ear infection caused by a virus such as chickenpox or herpes. Your doctor will probably tell you not to use neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any medical condition.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use extra ear drops to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
burning or stinging after instilling the medication
skin thinning
small white or red bumps on the skin
acne
unwanted hair growth
skin color changes
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination and call your doctor immediately:
hearing loss, which may be permanent
skin redness, swelling, or itching
skin dryness or scaling
decreased urination
swelling of the legs, ankles, or feet
unusual tiredness or weakness
Neomycin, polymyxin, and hydrocortisone otic combination may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cortisporin Otic Solution
®
(as a combination product containing Neomycin, Polymyxin, Hydrocortisone)
Casporyn HC Otic Suspension
®
(as a combination product containing Neomycin, Polymyxin, Hydrocortisone)
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page