Dihydroergotamine Nasal Spray: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dihydroergotamine Nasal Spray
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a622002.html
Dihydroergotamine Nasal Spray
pronounced as (dye hye droe er got' a meen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Do not take dihydroergotamine if you are taking any of the following medications: antifungals such as itraconazole (Sporanox) and ketoconazole (Nizoral); HIV protease inhibitors such as indinavir (Crixivan), nelfinavir (Viracept), and ritonavir (Norvir); or macrolide antibiotics such as clarithromycin (Biaxin), erythromycin (E.E.S., E-Mycin, Erythrocin), and troleandomycin (TAO).
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dihydroergotamine is used to treat migraine headaches (severe, throbbing headaches that sometimes are accompanied by nausea and sensitivity to sound and light). Dihydroergotamine is in a class of medications called ergot alkaloids. It works by tightening blood vessels in the brain and by stopping the release of natural substances in the brain that cause swelling.
How should this medicine be used?
Dihydroergotamine comes as a spray to use in the nose. If you are using dihydroergotamine nasal spray (Migranal) to treat migraine headache, it is given as one spray in each nostril and then after 15 minutes, an additional spray in each nostril for a total of 4 sprays. If you are using dihydroergotamine nasal spray (Trudhesa) to treat migraine headaches, it is given as one spray in each nostril. If headache continues after 1 hour, an additional dose of dihydroergotamine nasal spray (Trudhesa) can be given in each nostril. For all dihydroergotamine nasal spray products, no more than 4 sprays (2 doses) should be given in a 24-hour period or 6 sprays (3 doses) in a 7-day period. Dihydroergotamine nasal spray should be given at start of migraine symptoms but can be used at any time during the migraine. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use dihydroergotamine nasal spray exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You may use your first dose of dihydroergotamine nasal spray in a doctor's office or other medical facility where you can be monitored for serious reactions.
Using dihydroergotamine nasal spray more than 10 times in a one month period may cause headaches to worsen. To help prevent this from happening, be sure to mark on a calendar or write down days when dihydroergotamine nasal spray is used.
To use the nasal spray, follow these steps:
Read all of the manufacturer's instructions for using the nasal spray before you use your first dose.
Do not assemble sprayer until you are ready to use the product.
Remove the blue cap, metal seal and grey rubber stopper from the vial.
Remove the plastic cap from the spray pump and attach vial to the bottom of the pump. Rotate clockwise until vial is securely attached to pump.
Holding the device upright and pointing away from you, pump the nasal spray 4 times to prime the pump. Do not spray more than 4 times.
Once primed, rotate the pump so it is facing you, but keeping it upright, and then insert into first nostril until comfortable and gently press down on pump to release dose into nostril. Then, repeat in the second nostril.
For the dihydroergotamine (Migranal) product, refrain from sniffing through the nose during or immediately following use of the nasal spray. For the dihydroergotamine (Trudhesa) product, sniffing during or after nasal spray is not needed but will not hurt you.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using dihydroergotamine nasal spray,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to dihydroergotamine, other ergot alkaloids such as bromocriptine (Parlodel), ergonovine (Ergotrate), ergotamine (Cafergot, Ercaf, others), methylergonovine (Methergine), and methysergide (Sansert), or any other medications.
do not use dihydroergotamine within 24 hours of taking ergot alkaloids such as bromocriptine (Parlodel), ergonovine (Ergotrate), ergotamine (Cafergot, Ercaf, others), methylergonovine (Methergine), and methysergide (Sansert); or other medications for migraine such as frovatriptan (Frova), naratriptan (Amerge), rizatriptan (Maxalt), sumatriptan (Imitrex), and zolmitriptan (Zomig). Do not use dihydroergotamine with medications that are used to raise blood pressure such as droxidopa (Northera), epinephrine (Epipen), midodrine (Orvaten), phenylephrine (Biorphen, Vazculep; in Pherazine and several over-the-counter cold products), and pseudoephedrine (Sudafed).
some medications should not be taken with dihydroergotamine nasal spray. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with dihyroergotamine nasal spray. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before using dihydroergotamine nasal spray with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while using dihydroergotamine nasal spray, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription product may interact with dihydroergotamine nasal spray: nicotine. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start using dihydroergotamine nasal spray. Do not start this medication while using dihydroergotamine nasal spray without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have a family history of heart disease and if you have or have ever had high blood pressure; high cholesterol; diabetes; Raynaud's disease (a condition that affects the fingers and toes); any disease that affects your circulation or arteries; sepsis (a severe infection of the blood); surgery on your heart or blood vessels; a heart attack; or kidney, liver, lung, or heart disease. Your doctor may tell you not to take dihydroergotamine.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using dihydroergotamine, call your doctor immediately.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using dihydroergotamine.
tell your doctor if you use tobacco products. Smoking cigarettes while using this medication increases the risk of serious side effects.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while using this medication.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dihydroergotamine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away.
stuffy nose
tingling or pain in the nose or throat
dryness in the nose
nosebleed
taste changes
upset stomach
vomiting
dizziness
extreme tiredness
weakness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
color changes, numbness or tingling in fingers and toes
muscle pain in arms and legs
weakness in arms and legs
chest pain
speeding or slowing of heart rate
swelling
itching
cold, pale skin
slow or difficult speech
dizziness
faintness
Dihydroergotamine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and light. Dispose of unused nasal spray 8 hours after you open the vial.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
numbness, tingling, and pain in fingers and toes
blue color in fingers and toes
slowed breathing
upset stomach
vomiting
fainting
blurred vision
dizziness
confusion
seizures
coma
stomach pain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to dihydroergotamine.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Migranal
®
Nasal Spray
Trudhesa
®
Nasal Spray
Last Revised -
01/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page