Thyroid: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Thyroid
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682475.html
Thyroid
pronounced as (thye' roid)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Notice:
On August 6, 2025, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announced plans to take action against manufacturers of unapproved animal-derived thyroid medications including those labeled as Armour
®
Thyroid, Dessicated Thyroid or Natural Thyroid. Manufacturers will have to cease distribution of these products until they have addressed the FDA's concerns. Patients taking these products should contact their healthcare providers to discuss transition to an alternative FDA-approved product. Contact your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. Additional information on this FDA notice can be found here:
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/enforcement-activities-fda/fdas-actions-address-unapproved-thyroid-medications?utm_medium=email&utm_source=govdelivery
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Thyroid hormone should not be used to speed weight loss in people who are overweight but do not have a thyroid condition. Thyroid hormone will not help speed weight loss in people with normal thyroid glands, and it may cause serious or life-threatening side effects in these people. The risk of serious side effects is even higher if thyroid is also taken with amphetamines such as benzphetamine (Didrex
®
), dextroamphetamine([Dexedrine
®
, in Adderall
®
), and methamphetamine (Desoxyn
®
).
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Thyroid is used to treat the symptoms of hypothyroidism (a condition where the thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroid hormone). Symptoms of hypothyroidism include lack of energy, depression, constipation, weight gain, hair loss, dry skin, dry coarse hair, muscle cramps, decreased concentration, aches and pains, swelling of the legs, and increased sensitivity to cold. Thyroid is also used to treat goiter (enlarged thyroid gland). Thyroid is in a class of medications called thyroid agents. It works by supplying the thyroid hormone normally produced by the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Thyroid comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken once a day before breakfast. Take thyroid at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take thyroid exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of thyroid and gradually increase your dose.
Thyroid helps control the symptoms of hypothyroidism, but does not cure this condition. It may take up to several weeks before you notice any change in your symptoms. To control the symptoms of hypothyroidism, you probably will need to take thyroid for the rest of your life. Continue to take thyroid even if you feel well. Do not stop taking thyroid without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking thyroid,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to thyroid, any other medications, pork, or any of the ingredients in thyroid tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, and nutritional supplements you are taking or plan to take while taking thyroid. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.g ;
if you take cholestyramine (Questran
®
) or colestipol (Colestid
®
), take it at least 4 hours before taking your thyroid medication. If you take antacids, iron-containing medications or nutritional supplements, simethicone, or sucralfate (Carafate
®
), take them at least 4 hours before or 4 hours after taking your thyroid medication.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with thyroid: St. John's wort; salicylate pain relievers such as aspirin and aspirin-containing products, choline magnesium trisalicylate, choline salicylate (Arthropan
®
), diflunisal (Dolobid
®
), magnesium salicylate (Doan's
®
, others), and salsalate (Argesic
®
, Disalcid
®
, Salgesic
®
); strong iodine solution (Lugol's Solution
®
). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking thyroid. Do not start any of these medications while taking thyroid without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes; osteoporosis; hardening or narrowing of the arteries (atherosclerosis); cardiovascular disease such as high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol and fats, angina (chest pain), arrhythmias, or heart attack; malabsorption diseases (conditions that cause a decrease in absorption from the intestine); an underactive adrenal or pituitary gland; or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking thyroid, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking thyroid if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take thyroid becasue it is not as safe as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking thyroid.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one. Tell your doctor if you miss two or more doses of thyroid in a row.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Thyroid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
weight loss
shaking of a part of your body that you cannot control
headache
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
stomach cramps
hyperactivity
anxiety
irritability or rapid changes in mood
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
flushing
increased appetite
fever
changes in menstrual cycle
muscle weakness
temporary hair loss, particularly in children during the first month of therapy
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
difficulty breathing or swallowing
chest pain
rapid or irregular heartbeat
swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
excessive sweating
sensitivity or intolerance to heat
nervousness
seizure
Thyroid may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to thyroid.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking thyroid.
Thyroid tablets may have a strong odor. This does not mean that the medication is spoiled or that it cannot be used.
Learn the brand name and generic name of your medication. Check your medication each time you have your prescription refilled or receive a new prescription. Do not switch brands without talking to your doctor or pharmacist, as each brand of thyroid contains a slightly different amount of medication.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Armour
®
Thyroid
Other names
Desiccated thyroid
thyroid extract
thyroid gland
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page