Anacaulase-bcdb topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Anacaulase-bcdb topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a624067.html
Anacaulase-bcdb topical
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Anacaulase-bcdb is used for the removal of dead tissue caused by second- and third-degree burns. Anacaulase-bcdb is a mixture of proteolytic enzymes extracted from pineapple plant stems. It works by dissolving dead tissue that is caused by second- and third-degree burns.
How should this medicine be used?
Anacaulase-bcdb comes as a gel to be applied to the skin by a doctor or nurse. It is usually applied as a single application to a burn wound area and then covered with a sterile dressing. After 4 hours, your doctor or nurse will remove the dressing and the dead tissue. For adults, your doctor may decide use a second application of anacaulase-bcdb gel 24 hours after the first application.
Your doctor will give you medications to take for pain management 15 minutes before and during your treatment with anacaulase-bcdb topical gel. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving anacaulase-bcdb topical,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to anacaulase-bcdb, bromelain, pineapples, papayas, papain, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in anacaulase-bcdb topical gel. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a bleeding disorder, ulcers, a low platelet count, or sepsis (a severe infection of the blood).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Anacaulase-bcdb may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting
nausea
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
runny nose
rapid or increased heartbeat
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
hives; rash; itching; swelling of the lips, tongue, or throat; shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
itching, pain, or discomfort at the wound site
unusual bruising or bleeding
fever, sore throat, ongoing cough and congestion, burning or pain when you urinate, or other signs of infection
Aanacaulase-bcdb topical may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nexobrid
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page