Butoconazole Vaginal Cream: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Butoconazole Vaginal Cream
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682012.html
Butoconazole Vaginal Cream
pronounced as (byoo toe koe' na zole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Butoconazole is used to treat yeast infections of the vagina.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Butoconazole comes as a cream to insert into the vagina. It is usually used daily at bedtime. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use butoconazole exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
To use the vaginal cream, read the instructions provided with the medication and follow these steps:
Fill the special applicator that comes with the cream to the level indicated.
Lie on your back with your knees drawn upward and spread apart.
Insert the applicator high into your vagina (unless you are pregnant), and then push the plunger to release the medication. If you are pregnant, insert the applicator gently. If you feel resistance (hard to insert), do not try to insert it further; call your doctor.
Withdraw the applicator and discard.
Wash your hands promptly to avoid spreading the infection.
The dose should be applied when you lie down to go to bed. The drug works best if you do not get up again after applying it except to wash your hands. You may wish to wear a sanitary napkin to protect your clothing against stains. Do not use a tampon because it will absorb the drug. Do not douche unless your doctor tells you to do so.
Continue to use butoconazole even if you feel well. Do not stop using butoconazole without talking to your doctor. Continue using this medication during your menstrual period.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using butoconazole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to butoconazole or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription drugs you are taking, especially antibiotic medications and vitamins.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had diabetes, problems with your immune system, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV), or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using butoconazole, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Insert the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not insert a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Butoconazole may cause side effects. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
burning in vagina when cream is inserted
irritation in vagina when cream is inserted
stomach pain
fever
foul-smelling discharge
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Butoconazole is for external use only. Do not let cream get into your eyes or mouth, and do not swallow it.
Refrain from sexual intercourse. An ingredient in the cream may weaken certain latex products like condoms or diaphragms; do not use such products within 72 hours of using this medication. Wear clean cotton panties (or panties with cotton crotches), not panties made of nylon, rayon, or other synthetic fabrics.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the butoconazole, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Femstat 3
®
Gynazole-1
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page