Triamcinolone Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Triamcinolone Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625028.html
Triamcinolone Injection
pronounced as (trye″ am sin′ oh lone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Triamcinolone is used to reduce inflammation (swelling, heat, redness, and pain) and to treat allergic reactions, low amounts of corticosteroids produced by the body, and immune system conditions. Triamcinolone is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by changing the response of the immune system or to replace steroids that are normally produced by the body.
How should this medicine be used?
Triamcinolone comes as a suspension (liquid) to be injected into a muscle, joint, or lesion (area of damaged skin) by a healthcare provider. It is available as different products and your healthcare provider will decide which one to use for your condition.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving triamcinolone,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take when receiving triamcinolone. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura. Your doctor may tell you not to take triamcinolone.
tell your doctor if you have a current infection or have ever had high blood pressure, osteoporosis, diabetes, tuberculosis (TB), hepatitis B, a recent heart attack, or gastrointestinal, thyroid, liver, heart or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are received triamcinolone.
do not have any vaccinations without talking to your doctor.
to avoid contact with people who have chicken pox or measles. If you are in contact with people with these conditions, call your doctor right away.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Triamcinolone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
swelling, sudden weight gain
depression, changes in mood, or insomnia
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
itching, rash, hives
swelling of the lips, eyes, face, tongue, or throat; difficulty breathing or swallowing
sore throat, fever, chills, cough, or other signs of infection
vision problems
seizures
abnormal patches on the skin or inside the mouth
Triamcinolone may cause osteoporosis. Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking this medication.
Triamcinolone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to triamcinolone injection.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are using triamcinolone injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Kenalog
®
Zilretta
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page