Aspirin and Extended-Release Dipyridamole: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Aspirin and Extended-Release Dipyridamole
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a699053.html
Aspirin and Extended-Release Dipyridamole
pronounced as (dye peer id' a mole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole is in a class of drugs called antiplatelet agents. It works by preventing excessive blood clotting. It is used to reduce the risk of stroke in patients who have had or are at risk of stroke.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken twice a day, one capsule in the morning and one in the evening. Aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole should be swallowed whole. Do not open, crush, break, or chew the capsules.
Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
The combination of aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole decreases the risk of having a stroke but does not eliminate that risk. Continue to take aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole even if you feel well. Do not stop taking aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to aspirin, celecoxib (Celebrex), choline salicylate (Arthropan), diclofenac (Cataflam), diflunisal (Dolobid), dipyridamole (Persantine), etodolac (Lodine), fenoprofen (Nalfon), flurbiprofen (Ansaid), ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, Nuprin), indomethacin (Indocin), ketoprofen (Orudis, Oruvail), ketorolac (Toradol), magnesium salicylate (Nuprin Backache, Doan's), meclofenamate, mefenamic acid (Ponstel), meloxicam (Mobic), nabumetone (Relafen), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), oxaprozin (Daypro), piroxicam (Feldene), rofecoxib (Vioxx) (no longer available in the US), sulindac (Clinoril), tolmetin (Tolectin), or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any of the following: acetazolamide (Diamox); ambenonium (Mytelase); angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors such as benazepril (Lotensin), captopril (Capoten), enalapril (Vasotec), fosinopril (Monopril), lisinopril (Prinivil, Zestril), moexipril (Univasc), quinapril (Accupril), ramipril (Altace), and trandolapril (Mavik); anticoagulants ('blood thinners') such as warfarin (Coumadin) and heparin; beta-blockers such as acebutolol (Sectral), atenolol (Tenormin), betaxolol (Kerlone), bisoprolol (Zebeta), carteolol (Cartrol), carvedilol (Coreg), labetalol (Normodyne), metoprolol (Lopressor), nadolol (Corgard), penbutolol (Levatol), pindolol (Visken), propranolol (Inderal), sotalol (Betapace), and timolol (Blocadren); diabetes medications such as acetohexamide (Dymelor), chlorpropamide (Diabinese), glimepiride (Amaryl), glipizide (Glucotrol), glyburide (DiaBeta, Micronase, Glynase), repaglinide (Prandin), tolazamide (Tolinase), and tolbutamide (Orinase); diuretics ('water pills') such as amiloride (Midamor), bumetanide (Bumex), chlorothiazide (Diuril), chlorthalidone (Hygroton), ethacrynic acid (Edecrin), furosemide (Lasix), hydrochlorothiazide (Hydrodiuril), indapamide (Lozol), metolazone (Zaroxolyn), spironolactone (Aldactone), torsemide (Demadex), and triamterene (Dyrenium); methotrexate (Folex, Mexate, Rheumatrex); neostigmine (Prostigmin); nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as celecoxib (Celebrex), choline salicylate (Arthropan), diclofenac (Cataflam), diflunisal (Dolobid), etodolac (Lodine), fenoprofen (Nalfon), flurbiprofen (Ansaid), ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin, Nuprin, others), indomethacin (Indocin), ketoprofen (Orudis, Oruvail), ketorolac (Toradol), magnesium salicylate (Nuprin Backache, Doan's), meclofenamate, mefenamic acid (Ponstel), meloxicam (Mobic), nabumetone (Relafen), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), oxaprozin (Daypro), piroxicam (Feldene), sulindac (Clinoril), and tolmetin (Tolectin); phenytoin (Dilantin); probenecid (Benemid); pyridostigmine (Mestinon); sulfinpyrazone (Anturane); and valproic acid and related drugs (Depakene, Depakote).
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver, kidney, or heart disease; a recent heart attack; bleeding disorders; low blood pressure; vitamin K deficiency; ulcers; the syndrome of asthma, rhinitis, and nasal polyps; or if you drink three or more alcoholic drinks a day.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant; or are breast-feeding. Aspirin may harm the fetus and cause problems with delivery if it is taken around 20 weeks or later during pregnancy. Do not take aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole around or after 20 weeks of pregnancy, unless you are told to do so by your doctor. If you become pregnant while taking aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole. Your doctor may tell you to stop taking aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole before surgery.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet while taking aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Side effects from aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole can occur. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
heartburn
stomach pain
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
muscle and joint pain
tiredness
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
bleeding
severe rash
swelling of the lips, tongue, or mouth
difficulty breathing
warm feeling
flushing
sweating
restlessness
weakness
dizziness
chest pain
rapid heartbeat
ringing in the ears
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Do not substitute the individual components of aspirin and dipyridamole (Persantine) for the combination product of aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your response to aspirin and extended-release dipyridamole.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Aggrenox
®
(containing Aspirin, Dipyridamole)
Last Revised -
08/15/2023
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page