Lopinavir and Ritonavir: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Lopinavir and Ritonavir
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a602015.html
Lopinavir and Ritonavir
pronounced as (loe pin' a veer) (ri toe' na veer)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of lopinavir and ritonavir is used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Lopinavir and ritonavir are in a class of medications called protease inhibitors. They work by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood. When lopinavir and ritonavir are taken together, ritonavir also helps to increase the amount of lopinavir in the body to have a greater effect.
Although lopinavir and ritonavir will not cure HIV, these medications may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Taking these medications and making other life-style changes may decrease the risk of transmitting the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of lopinavir and ritonavir comes as a tablet and a solution (liquid) to take by mouth. Take twice a day. Certain adults may also take it once a day. Take the solution with food. The tablets may be taken with or without food. Take lopinavir and ritonavir at around the same time(s) every day.
Take lopinavir and ritonavir exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Shake the solution well before each use to mix the medication evenly. Use a dose-measuring spoon or cup to measure the correct amount of liquid for each dose. Do not use a regular household spoon.
Continue to take lopinavir and ritonavir even if you feel well. Do not stop taking lopinavir and ritonavir without talking to your doctor. If you miss doses, take less than the prescribed amount, or stop taking lopinavir and ritonavir, your condition may become more difficult to treat.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking lopinavir and ritonavir,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with lopinavir and ritonavir. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with lopinavir and ritonavir. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting lopinavir and ritonavir with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking lopinavir and ritonavir, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following herbal product may interact with lopinavir and ritonavir: St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking lopinavir and ritonavir. Do not start any of these medications while taking lopinavir and ritonavir without discussing with your healthcare provider.
if you are taking didanosine, take it 1 hour before or 2 hours after you take lopinavir and ritonavir solution with food. If you are taking lopinavir and ritonavir tablets, you may take them on an empty stomach at the same time as you take didanosine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an irregular heartbeat, a low level of potassium in your blood, hemophilia, high cholesterol or triglycerides (fat) in the blood, pancreatitis (swelling of the pancreas), or heart or liver disease.
you should know that lopinavir and ritonavir may decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraceptives (birth control pills, patches, rings, or injections). Talk to your doctor about using another form of birth control.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking lopinavir and ritonavir, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are taking lopinavir and ritonavir.
you should be aware that your body fat may increase or move to different areas of your body, such as your upper back, neck (''buffalo hump''), breasts, and around your stomach. You may notice a loss of body fat from your face, legs, and arms.
you should know that you may experience hyperglycemia (increases in your blood sugar) while you are taking this medication, even if you do not already have diabetes. Tell your doctor immediately if you have any of the following symptoms while you are taking lopinavir and ritonavir: extreme thirst, frequent urination, extreme hunger, blurred vision, or weakness. It is very important to call your doctor as soon as you have any of these symptoms, because high blood sugar that is not treated can cause a serious condition called ketoacidosis. Ketoacidosis may become life-threatening if it is not treated at an early stage. Symptoms of ketoacidosis include: dry mouth, nausea and vomiting, shortness of breath, breath that smells fruity, and decreased consciousness.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections. If you have new or worsening symptoms after starting treatment with lopinavir and ritonavir, be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Lopinavir and ritonavir may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea, nausea, vomiting
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
nausea, vomiting, stomach pain, extreme tiredness, loss of appetite, pain in the upper right part of the stomach, yellowing of the skin or eyes, itchy skin
dizziness, lightheadedness, fainting, irregular heartbeat
blisters, rash
Lopinavir and ritonavir may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the tablets at room temperature and protect them from excess moisture. Keep the tablets in the container they came in. If you must take the tablets out of the container, you should use them within 2 weeks. Keep the oral solution in the refrigerator until the expiration date printed on the label, or store it at room temperature and use within 2 months.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
It is especially important to get medical help right away if a child drinks more than the usual dose of the solution. The solution contains a large amount of alcohol and other ingredients that could be very harmful to a child.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to lopinavir and ritonavir.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names of combination products
Kaletra
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page