Interferon Gamma-1b Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Interferon Gamma-1b Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601152.html
Interferon Gamma-1b Injection
pronounced as (in'' ter feer' on gam' ma wun bee)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Interferon gamma-1b injection is used to reduce the frequency and severity of serious infections in people with chronic granulomatous disease (an inherited immune system disease). It is also used to slow down worsening of their condition in people with severe, malignant osteopetrosis (an inherited bone disease). Interferon gamma-1b is in a class of medications called immunomodulators. It is not known exactly how interferon gamma-1b works to treat chronic granulomatous disease and osteopetrosis.
How should this medicine be used?
Interferon gamma-1b injection comes as a solution to inject subcutaneously (just under the skin) three times a week, for example, every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday. Inject interferon gamma-1b injection at around the same time of day each time you inject it. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use interferon gamma-1b injection exactly as directed. Do not inject more or less of it or inject it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
You will receive your first dose of interferon gamma-1b in your doctor's office. Then you can inject interferon gamma-1b yourself or have a friend or relative give the injections. Before you use interferon gamma-1b yourself the first time, read the written instructions that come with it. Ask your doctor or pharmacist to show you or the person who will be injecting the medication how to inject it.
Never reuse or share syringes, needles, or vials of medication. Throw away used needles and syringes in a puncture-resistant container and throw away used vials of medication in the trash. Talk to your doctor or pharmacist about how to dispose of the puncture-resistant container.
You can inject interferon gamma-1b in your upper arms, stomach area, or your thighs. Choose a different spot each time you inject your medication. Do not inject your medication into skin that is irritated, bruised, reddened, infected, or scarred.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet when you begin treatment with interferon gamma-1b and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving interferon gamma-1b injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to interferon gamma-1b injection, products made from the
E. coli
bacteria, any other medications, or any of the other ingredients in interferon gamma-1b injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had seizures, a low number of red or low white blood cells, heart failure, an irregular heartbeat, or heart or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving interferon gamma-1b injection, call your doctor.
you should know that you may have flu-like symptoms such as headache, fever, chills, muscle aches, and tiredness after your injection. Your doctor may tell you to take acetaminophen (Tylenol), an over-the-counter pain and fever medication, to help with these symptoms. Talk to your doctor if these symptoms are difficult to manage or become severe.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss a dose of interferon gamma-1b injection, do not increase your dose or give two injections to make up for the missed dose.Call your doctor if you miss a dose and have questions about what to do.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Interferon gamma-1b injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
extreme tiredness
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
muscle or joint pain
dizziness
problems with walking
confusion
bruising, redness, swelling, bleeding, or irritation at the injection spot
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS section, stop the medication and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
hives
swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, tongue, and throat
Interferon gamma-1b injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the refrigerator and out of reach of children. Interferon gamma-1b may be left at room temperature for no longer than 12 hours. Do not freeze interferon gamma-1b.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Actimmune
®
Last Revised -
12/15/2015
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page