Denileukin Diftitox Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Denileukin Diftitox Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611024.html
Denileukin Diftitox Injection
pronounced as (den'' i loo' kin dif' ti tox)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Denileukin diftitox injection and denileukin diftitox-cxdl injection are biologic medications (medications made from living organisms). Biosimilar denileukin diftitox-cxdl injection is highly similar to denileukin diftitox injection and work the same way as denileukin diftitox injection in the body. Therefore, the term denileukin diftitox injection products will be used to represent these medications in this discussion.
IMPORTANT WARNING:
You may experience a serious or life-threatening reaction while you receive a dose of a denileukin diftitox injection product. You will receive each dose of medication in a medical facility, and your doctor will monitor you carefully while you are receiving the medication. Your doctor will prescribe certain medications to prevent these reactions. You will take these medications by mouth shortly before you receive each dose of a denileukin diftitox product. If you experience any of the following symptoms during or for 24 hours after your infusion, tell your doctor immediately: fever, chills, hives, difficulty breathing or swallowing, slowed breathing, or chest pain.
Some people who received a denileukin diftitox product developed life-threatening capillary leak syndrome (a condition that causes the body to keep excess fluid, low blood pressure, and low levels of a protein [albumin] in the blood). Capillary leak syndrome may occur up to 2 weeks after a denileukin diftitox product is given and may continue or get worse even after treatment is stopped. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: swelling of the hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs; weight gain; shortness of breath; fainting; dizziness or lightheadedness; or fast or irregular heartbeat.
Denileukin diftitox injection products may cause vision changes, including blurred vision, loss of vision, and loss of color vision. Vision changes may be permanent. If you experience any changes in vision call your doctor immediately.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests to check your body's response to denileukin diftitox injection products.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Denileukin diftitox injection products are used to treat cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL, a group of cancers of the immune system that first appear as skin rashes) in people whose disease has not improved, has gotten worse, or has come back after taking other medications. Denileukin diftitox is in a class of medications called cytotoxic proteins. It works by killing cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Denileukin diftitox injection products come as a solution (liquid) or as a powder to be mixed with liquid to be injected over 30 to 60 minutes intravenously (into a vein). Denileukin diftitox injection products are administered by a doctor or nurse in a medical facility. It is usually given once a day for 5 days in a row. This cycle may be repeated every 21 days for up to eight cycles.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking denileukin diftitox injection products,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to denileukin diftitox, denileukin diftitox-cxdl, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in denileukin diftitox or denileukin diftitox-cxdl. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had thyroid, kidney, or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You must have a pregnancy test before you start treatment with a denileukin diftitox injection product. You should use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment with a denileukin diftitox injection product and for 1 week after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use. If you become pregnant while receiving a denileukin diftitox injection product, call your doctor. Denileukin diftitox injection products may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. Do not breastfeed during your treatment and for 1 week after your final dose.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you miss an appointment to receive a dose of a denileukin diftitox injection product, call your doctor right away.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Denileukin diftitox injection products may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
constipation
decreased appetite
change in ability to taste
increased weight
feeling tired
pain, including back, muscle, or joint pain
cough
headache
weakness
rash
itching
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or any symptoms listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately.
decreased urination; swelling of the face, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs; or unusual tiredness or weakness
redness, swelling, oozing pus or other signs of skin infection
feeling confused or any other sudden or unusual changes in behavior, thinking, or mood
Denileukin diftitox may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
This medication will be stored at your doctor's office or clinic.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
nausea
vomiting
fever
chills
weakness
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about denileukin diftitox products.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ontak
®
(denileukin diftitox)
Lymphir
®
(denileukin diftitox-cxdl)
Last Revised -
10/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page