Dobutamine Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Dobutamine Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625018.html
Dobutamine Injection
pronounced as ( doe bue′ ta meen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Dobutamine is used to make your heart muscles beat stronger and work better to pump blood throughout your body. Dobutamine is in a class of medications called selective β
1
-adrenergic agonists. It works by stimulating the heart muscles to improve the pumping action of the heart.
How should this medicine be used?
Dobutamine comes as a solution for injection. It is mixed with other fluids and given into a vein by a healthcare provider.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of dobutamine and gradually increase or decrease your dose depending on your response. Dobutamine is routinely given for a short period of time, usually for not more than several hours.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving dobutamine,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving dobutamine. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis (a type of heart disease). Your doctor will probably tell you not to receive dobutamine.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood pressure, atrial fibrillation (AFib, AF; irregular heartbeat), or a recent heart attack.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Dobutamine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, tell your doctor immediately:
rash, fever, difficulty swallowing or breathing
chest pain or changes in heartbeat
dizziness, weakness, fainting
tenderness, redness, pain, or swelling at the place of injection
Dobutamine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What other information should I know?
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Dobutrex
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page