Methyldopa and Hydrochlorothiazide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Methyldopa and Hydrochlorothiazide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601076.html
Methyldopa and Hydrochlorothiazide
pronounced as (meth ill doe' pa) (hye droe klor oh thye' a zide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide is used to treat high blood pressure. Methyldopa works by relaxing the blood vessels so that blood can flow more easily through the body. Hydrochlorothiazide helps to lower blood pressure by eliminating unneeded water and salt from the body.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
This medication comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It usually is taken two or three times a day. To help you remember to take methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide, take it around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
This medication controls high blood pressure but does not cure it. Continue to take methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide even if you feel well. Do not stop taking methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to methyldopa, hydrochlorothiazide, sulfa medications, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide tablets. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
if you are taking iron supplements or vitamins containing iron, do not take them at the same time as you take methyldopa and hydrochlorthiazide. Ask your doctor how long you should wait after taking these supplements before you take methyldopa.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had kidney or liver disease, diabetes, gout, or high blood cholesterol.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide because it is not as safe as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery for 48-72 hours after you begin to take this medication or after your dose is increased.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are taking methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide. Alcohol can make the side effects from methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Your doctor may prescribe a low-salt or low-sodium diet. Follow these directions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
dark urine
frequent urination
dry mouth
headache
upset stomach
vomiting
loss of appetite
diarrhea
gas
rash
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
extreme tiredness
muscle weakness or cramps
unexplained fever
yellowing of the skin or eyes
trouble breathing
swollen ankles or feet
This medication may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your blood pressure should be checked regularly to determine your response to methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide.
To relieve dry mouth caused by methyldopa and hydrochlorothiazide, chew gum or suck sugarless hard candy.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Aldoril
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page