Nicotine Oral Inhalation: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nicotine Oral Inhalation
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a606021.html
Nicotine Oral Inhalation
pronounced as (nik' oh teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Notice:
Nicotine oral inhalation has been discontinued in the US. Because this drug is no longer available in the US market, the material in this monograph is no longer updated. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers’ labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nicotine oral inhalation is used to help people stop smoking. Nicotine oral inhalation should be used together with a smoking cessation program, which may include support groups, counseling, or specific behavioral change techniques. Nicotine inhalation is in a class of medications called smoking cessation aids. It works by providing nicotine to your body to decrease the withdrawal symptoms experienced when smoking is stopped and to reduce the urge to smoke.
How should this medicine be used?
Nicotine oral inhalation comes as a cartridge to inhale by mouth using a special inhaler. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use nicotine oral inhalation exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Follow your doctor's instructions about how many nicotine cartridges you should use each day. Your doctor may increase or decrease your dose depending on your urge to smoke. After you have used nicotine inhalation for 12 weeks and your body adjusts to not smoking, your doctor may decrease your dose gradually over the next 6 to 12 weeks until you are not using nicotine inhalation anymore. Follow your doctor's instructions for how to decrease your nicotine dose.
The nicotine in the cartridges is released by frequent puffing over 20 minutes. You may use up a cartridge all at once or puff on it for a few minutes at a time until the nicotine is finished. You may want to try different schedules to see what works best for you.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient. Read the directions for how to use the inhaler and ask your doctor or pharmacist to show you the proper technique. Practice using the inhaler while in his or her presence.
If you have not stopped smoking at the end of 4 weeks, talk to your doctor. Your doctor can try to help you understand why you were not able to stop smoking and make plans to try again.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using nicotine oral inhalation,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nicotine, menthol, or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using nicotine inhalation. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have recently had a heart attack and if you have or have ever had asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; emphysema or chronic bronchitis), heart disease, angina, irregular heartbeat, problems with circulation such as Buerger's disease or Raynaud's phenomena, hyperthyroidism (an overactive thyroid), pheochromocytoma (a tumor on a small gland near the kidneys), insulin-dependent diabetes, ulcers, high blood pressure, and kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using nicotine inhalation, call your doctor. Nicotine may harm the fetus.
stop smoking completely. If you continue smoking while using nicotine inhalation, you may have side effects.
you should know that even though you are using nicotine inhalation, you may still have some smoking withdrawal symptoms. These include dizziness, anxiety, sleeping problems, depression, tiredness, and muscle pain. If you experience these symptoms, talk to your doctor about increasing your dose of nicotine inhalation.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nicotine oral inhalation may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
irritation in the mouth and throat
cough
runny nose
taste changes
pain of the jaw, neck, or back
tooth problems
sinus pressure and pain
headache
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
gas
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience the following symptom, call your doctor immediately:
rapid heart rate
Nicotine inhalation may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep all the parts of the nicotine inhaler and used and unused nicotine cartridges out of the reach of children and pets. Store the mouthpiece in the plastic storage case. Store the cartridges at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
paleness
cold sweat
nausea
drooling
vomiting
stomach pain
diarrhea
headache
dizziness
problems with hearing and vision
shaking of a part of your body that you cannot control
confusion
weakness
seizures
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nicotrol
®
Inhaler
Last Revised -
09/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page