Liraglutide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Liraglutide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a611003.html
Liraglutide Injection
pronounced as (lir'' a gloo' tide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Liraglutide injection may increase the risk that you will develop thyroid tumors, including a type of thyroid cancer. Liraglutide injection caused thyroid tumors in rats. It is not known if this medication increases the risk of tumors in humans. Tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had thyroid cancer or Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia syndrome type 2 (MEN 2; condition that causes tumors in more than one gland in the body). If so, your doctor will probably tell you not to use liraglutide injection. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately: lump or swelling in the neck; hoarseness; difficulty swallowing; or shortness of breath.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain tests to check your body's response to liraglutide injection.
You will be given the Medication Guide when you begin treatment with liraglutide injection and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of using liraglutide injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Liraglutide injection is used for the following:
to control blood sugar levels in certain patients with type 2 diabetes (condition in which blood sugar is too high because the body does not make or use insulin normally).
to reduce the risk of a heart attack, stroke, or death in adults with type 2 diabetes and heart and blood vessel disease.
to assist with weight loss in certain people who are obese or overweight and have weight-related medical problems.
Liraglutide injection is in a class of medications called incretin mimetics. It works by helping the pancreas to release the right amount of insulin when blood sugar levels are high. Insulin helps move sugar from the blood into other body tissues where it is used for energy. Liraglutide injection also slows the emptying of the stomach and may decrease appetite and cause weight loss.
Over time, people who have diabetes and high blood sugar can develop serious or life-threatening complications, including heart disease, stroke, kidney problems, nerve damage, and eye problems. Using medication(s), making lifestyle changes (e.g., diet, exercise, quitting smoking), and regularly checking your blood sugar may help to manage your diabetes and improve your health. This therapy may also decrease your chances of having a heart attack, stroke, or other diabetes-related complications such as kidney failure, nerve damage (numb, cold legs or feet; decreased sexual ability in men and women), eye problems, including changes or loss of vision, or gum disease. Your doctor and other healthcare providers will talk to you about the best way to manage your diabetes.
How should this medicine be used?
Liraglutide injection comes as a solution (liquid) in a prefilled dosing pen to inject subcutaneously (under the skin) in your stomach, thigh, or upper arm. It is injected once a day with or without food. Use liraglutide injection at around the same time every day.
Use liraglutide injection exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor will probably start you on a low dose of liraglutide injection and increase your dose after 1 week.
Liraglutide injection controls diabetes but does not cure it. Continue to use liraglutide injection even if you feel well. Do not stop using liraglutide injection without talking to your doctor.
If you are using liraglutide injection for weight loss, it may take time to lose a certain amount of weight. Talk to your doctor about how long it should take you to lose weight. Your doctor may tell you to stop using this medication if you do not lose a certain amount of weight during your treatment.
You will be shown how to use the injection pen by your doctor or nurse. You will also be given instructions for use with the medicine. This will tell you how to inject it. Read it carefully. Ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions on how to inject the medicine.
You will need to buy needles separately. Ask your doctor or pharmacist what type of needles you will need to inject your medication.
Always look at your liraglutide solution before you inject it. It should be clear, colorless, and free of particles. Do not use liraglutide if it is colored, cloudy, thickened, or contains solid particles, or if the expiration date on the bottle has passed.
Never reuse needles and never share needles or pens. Always remove the needle right after you inject your dose. Dispose of needles in a puncture-resistant container. Ask your doctor or pharmacist how to dispose of the puncture resistant container.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using liraglutide injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while using liraglutide injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription product may interact with liraglutide injection: acetaminophen (Tylenol
®
). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start using liraglutide injection. Do not start this medication while using liraglutide injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you drink or have ever drunk large amounts of alcohol, if you have or have ever had depression, thought about or attempted suicide, changes in behavior, pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas); severe stomach problems, including gastroparesis (slowed movement of food from the stomach to the small intestine), problems digesting food; a high level of triglycerides (fats) in the blood; gallstones (solid deposits that form in the gallbladder); or gallbladder, kidney or liver disease. Also tell your doctor if you have recently had diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting or if you cannot drink liquids by mouth, which may cause dehydration (loss of a large amount of body fluids).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you are pregnant you should not use liraglutide injection (Saxenda) for weight loss. If you become pregnant while using liraglutide injection (Victoza), call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are using liraglutide injection.
ask your doctor what to do if you get sick, develop an infection or fever, experience unusual stress, or are injured. These conditions can affect your blood sugar and the amount of liraglutide you may need.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Be sure to follow all exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Inject the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not inject a double dose to make up for a missed one. If you forget to use liraglutide injection for 3 or more days, call your doctor.
What side effects can this medication cause?
This medication may cause changes in your blood sugar. Signs and symptoms of low blood sugar may include dizziness or lightheadedness, irritability, sweating, hunger, drowsiness, shakiness, weakness, headache, fast heart rate and feeling jittery. You should know the symptoms of low and high blood sugar and what to do if you have these symptoms.
Liraglutide injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
constipation
heartburn
runny nose, sneezing, or cough
tiredness
difficulty urinating or pain or burning on urination
injection site rash or redness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience either of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING or SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS sections, stop using liraglutide injection and call your doctor immediately:
ongoing pain that begins in the upper left or middle of the stomach but may spread to the back
new or worsening depression, unusual changes in mood or behavior, or thinking about harming or killing yourself
vomiting
nausea
diarrhea
clay-colored stools
yellow eyes or skin
rash; itching; swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, tongue, or throat; difficulty breathing or swallowing; fainting or feeling dizzy; or rapid or pounding heartbeat
Liraglutide injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in and out of reach of children. Store it away from light and heat. Store unused liraglutide pens in the refrigerator (36°F to 46°F [2°C to 8°C]) but do not place them near the refrigerator cooling element. Once a liraglutide pen is in use, store it at room temperature (59°F to 86°F [15°C to 30°C]) or in the refrigerator. Do not freeze. Do not use liraglutide if it has been frozen or exposed to temperatures above 86°F (30°C). Keep the cap on the liraglutide pen when it is not in use.
When traveling, keep liraglutide pens dry and at a temperature between 59°F to 86°F (15°C to 30°C).
Note the date you first use a liraglutide pen, and throw away the pen after 30 days, even if there is some solution left in the pen.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
severe nausea
severe vomiting
What other information should I know?
If you are using liraglutide (Victoza
®
) injection for treatment of diabetes, your blood sugar and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) should be checked regularly to determine your response to this medication. Your doctor will also tell you how to check your response to the medication by measuring your blood sugar levels at home. Follow these directions carefully.
If you are using liraglutide (Saxenda
®
) injection for weight management, your heart rate and weight will be checked regularly during treatment.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Saxenda
®
Victoza
®
Xultophy
®
(as a combination product containing Insulin Degludec and Liraglutide)
Last Revised -
05/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page