Clioquinol Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clioquinol Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682367.html
Clioquinol Topical
pronounced as (klye oh kwin' ole)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Notice:
Clioquinol topical is no longer available in the United States. If you are currently using clioquinol, you should call your doctor to discuss switching to another treatment.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Clioquinol is used to treat skin infections such as eczema, athlete's foot, jock itch, and ringworm.
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
How should this medicine be used?
Clioquinol comes as a cream, lotion, and ointment to apply to the skin. Clioquinol is usually used two to four times a day for 4 weeks (2 weeks for jock itch). Follow the directions on the label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use clioquinol exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than indicated on the product label.
Thoroughly clean the infected area, allow it to dry, and then gently rub the medication in until most of it disappears. Use just enough medication to cover the affected area. You should wash your hands after applying the medication.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using clioquinol,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to clioquinol or any other drugs.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are about to take a thyroid function test.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while using clioquinol, call your doctor.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Clioquinol may cause side effects. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
itching
burning
irritation or stinging
redness
swelling
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not freeze. Protect it from light.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor. Clioquinol is for external use only and may stain your clothes, hair, skin, and nails yellow. Do not let clioquinol get into your eyes or mouth, and do not swallow it. Do not apply cosmetics, lotions, or other skin products to the area being treated unless your doctor tells you.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. If you still have the symptoms of infection after you finish the clioquinol, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Vioform
®
Other names
Iodochlorhydroxyquin
Last Revised -
06/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page