Eplerenone: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Eplerenone
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603004.html
Eplerenone
pronounced as (e pler' en one)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Eplerenone is used alone or in combination with other medications to treat high blood pressure. Eplerenone is in a class of medications called mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists. It works by blocking the action of aldosterone, a natural substance in the body that raises blood pressure.
High blood pressure is a common condition and when not treated, can cause damage to the brain, heart, blood vessels, kidneys and other parts of the body. Damage to these organs may cause heart disease, a heart attack, heart failure, stroke, kidney failure, loss of vision, and other problems. In addition to taking medication, making lifestyle changes will also help to control your blood pressure. These changes include eating a diet that is low in fat and salt, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising at least 30 minutes most days, not smoking, and using alcohol in moderation.
How should this medicine be used?
Eplerenone comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once or twice a day, with or without food. To help you remember to take eplerenone, take it around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take eplerenone exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of eplerenone and increase your dose after 4 weeks.
Eplerenone controls high blood pressure but does not cure it. It may take 4 weeks or longer before you feel the full benefit of eplerenone. Continue to take eplerenone even if you feel well. Do not stop taking eplerenone without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking eplerenone,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to eplerenone, any other medications, or any ingredients in eplerenone tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with eplerenone. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with eplerenone. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting eplerenone with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking eplerenone, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist..
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with eplerenone: St. John's wort; aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin) and naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn); potassium supplements. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking eplerenone. Do not start any of these medications while taking eplerenone without discussing with your healthcare provider; .
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had high blood levels of potassium, diabetes, gout, or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking eplerenone, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medicine.
Do not use salt substitutes containing potassium while you are taking eplerenone. If your doctor prescribes a low-salt or low-sodium diet, follow these directions carefully.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Eplerenone may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
dizziness
diarrhea
stomach pain
cough
excessive tiredness
flu-like symptoms
breast enlargement or tenderness
abnormal vaginal bleeding
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience any of them, call your doctor immediately:
chest pain
tingling in arms and legs
loss of muscle tone
weakness or heaviness in legs
confusion
lack of energy
cold, gray skin
irregular heartbeat
Eplerenone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
fainting
dizziness
blurred vision
upset stomach
tingling in arms and legs
loss of muscle tone
weakness or heaviness in legs
confusion
lack of energy
cold, gray skin
irregular or slow heartbeat
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will check your blood pressure regularly and order certain lab tests to check your body's response to eplerenone.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Inspra
®
Last Revised -
07/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page