Clemastine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clemastine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682542.html
Clemastine
pronounced as (klem' as teen)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Clemastine is used to relieve hay fever and allergy symptoms, including sneezing; runny nose; and red, itchy, tearing eyes. Prescription strength clemastine is also used to relieve the itching and swelling of hives. Clemastine helps control symptoms of allergies and colds but does not treat the cause of these symptoms or speed recovery. Clemastine is in a class of medications called antihistamines. It works by blocking the action of histamine, a substance in the body that causes allergic symptoms.
How should this medicine be used?
Clemastine comes as a tablet and a liquid to take by mouth. It is usually taken two or three times a day. Follow the directions on your prescription label or package label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take clemastine exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor or directed by the label.
If you are taking the liquid, do not use a household spoon to measure your dose. Use the measuring spoon or cup that came with the medication or use a spoon made especially for measuring medication.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking clemastine,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to clemastine, other antihistamine medications, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in clemastine tablets or liquid. Ask your doctor or pharmacist or check the package label for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with clemastine. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with clemastine. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting clemastine with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking clemastine, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had asthma or lung disease; glaucoma (a condition in which increased pressure in the eye can lead to gradual loss of vision); ulcers; difficulty urinating (due to an enlarged prostate gland); blockage in the passage between the stomach and intestine; blockage in the bladder;heart disease; high blood pressure; seizures; or an overactive thyroid gland.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking clemastine, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking clemastine.
you should know that this medication may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
talk to your doctor about the safe use of alcohol while you are taking clemastine. Alcohol can make the side effects of this medication worse.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of taking clemastine if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually take clemastine because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat the same condition.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually taken as needed. If your doctor has told you to take clemastine regularly, take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Clemastine may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
dry mouth, nose, and throat
dizziness
decreased coordination
nausea
chest congestion
headache
excitement (especially in children)
nervousness
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
difficulty urinating
changes in vision
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
hives
rash
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
Clemastine may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you experience any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about clemastine.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Dayhist
®
Allergy
Tavist
®
Tavist
®
Allergy (formerly Tavist-1
®
)
Other names
meclastine fumarate
mecloprodin fumarate
Last Revised -
07/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page