Isavuconazonium Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Isavuconazonium Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615030.html
Isavuconazonium Injection
pronounced as (eye'' sa vue koe'' na zoe' nee um)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Isavuconazonium injection is used to treat serious fungal infections such as invasive aspergillosis (a fungal infection that begins in the lungs and spreads through the bloodstream to other organs) and invasive mucormycosis (a fungal infection that usually begins in the sinuses, brain, or lungs) in adults and children 1 year of age and older. Isavuconazonium injection is in a class of medications called azole antifungals. It works by slowing the growth of fungi that cause infection.
How should this medicine be used?
Isavuconazonium injection comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and injected intravenously (into a vein). Isavuconazonium injection may also be administered through a nasogastric (NG) tube. It is usually given over at least 1 hour every 8 hours for the first six doses and then once a day. The length of your treatment depends on your general health, the type of infection that you have, and how well you respond to the medication.
You may receive isavuconazonium injection in a hospital or you may administer the medication at home. If you will be receiving isavuconazonium injection at home, your healthcare provider will show you how to use the medication. Be sure that you understand these directions, and ask your healthcare provider if you have any questions.
If you have a nasogastric (NG) tube, your doctor or pharmacist will explain how to prepare isavuconazonium injection to give through an NG tube.
Isavuconazonium injection may cause serious reactions during infusion of the medication. If you experience any of the following symptoms, tell your doctor immediately: difficulty breathing or shortness of breath; chills; shaking; dizziness; feeling faint; numbness, burning, or tingling in the hands, arms, feet, or legs; or changes in your sense of touch. Your doctor may need to stop your treatment if you experience these side effects.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving isavuconazonium injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to isavuconazonium, fluconazole (Diflucan), itraconazole (Sporanox, Tolsura), ketoconazole, posaconazole (Noxafil), voriconazole (Vfend), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in isavuconazonium injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Some medications should not be taken with isavuconazonium injection. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with isavuconazonium injection. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting isavuconazonium injection with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while recieving isavuconazonium injection, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with isavuconazonium injection: St. John's wort. You should not take this medication while receiving isavuconazonium injection.
tell your doctor if you or anyone in your family has or has ever had short QT syndrome (condition that increases the risk of irregular heartbeat, dizziness, fainting, or sudden death). Your doctor will probably tell you not to receive isavuconazonium injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had an arrhythmia (abnormal heart rate or rhythm) or other heart problems, a low level of potassium in your blood, cancer of the blood cells, or liver problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should not become pregnant during your treatment with isavuconazonium injection and for 28 days after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. If you become pregnant while receiving isavuconazonium injection, call your doctor. Isavuconazonium may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Your doctor may tell you not to breastfeed during your treatment with isavuconazonium injection.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while receiving this medication.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Isavuconazonium injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
constipation
headache
back pain
cough
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
anxiety
agitation
confusion
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
heartburn or indigestion
decreased appetite
redness, pain, or swelling at the injection site
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash; hives; itching; swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, or eyes; hoarseness; difficulty breathing or swallowing; fast or irregular heartbeat; dizziness; sweating; or fainting
peeling or blistering skin
nausea; vomiting; yellowing of the skin or eyes; extreme tiredness; or flu-like symptoms
swelling of the hands, feet, arms or legs
Isavuconazonium injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
headache
dizziness
pain, burning, or tingling in the hands or feet
drowsiness
difficulty focusing
change in sense of taste
dry mouth
numbness in the mouth
diarrhea
vomiting
sudden reddening of the face, neck, or upper chest
anxiety
restlessness
pounding or fast heartbeat
eye sensitivity to light
joint pain
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to isavuconazonium injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Cresemba
®
Last Revised -
05/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page