Metoclopramide Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Metoclopramide Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a601158.html
Metoclopramide Injection
pronounced as (met oh kloe pra' mide)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Receiving metoclopramide injection may cause you to develop a muscle problem called tardive dyskinesia. If you develop tardive dyskinesia, you will move your muscles, especially the muscles in your face in unusual ways. You will not be able to control or stop these movements. Tardive dyskinesia may not go away even after you stop receiving metoclopramide injection. The longer you receive metoclopramide injection, the greater the risk that you will develop tardive dyskinesia. Therefore, your doctor will probably tell you not to receive metoclopramide injection for longer than 12 weeks. The risk that you will develop tardive dyskinesia is also greater if you are taking medications for mental illness, if you have diabetes, or if you are elderly, especially if you are a woman. Call your doctor immediately if you develop any uncontrollable body movements, especially lip smacking, mouth puckering, chewing, frowning, scowling, sticking out your tongue, blinking, eye movements, or shaking arms or legs.
Your doctor or pharmacist will give you the manufacturer's patient information sheet (Medication Guide) when you begin treatment with metoclopramide injection and each time you refill your prescription. Read the information carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. You can also visit the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website (
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm085729.htm
) to obtain the Medication Guide.
Talk to your doctor about the risk of receiving metoclopramide injection.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Metoclopramide injection is used to relieve symptoms caused by slow stomach emptying in people who have diabetes. These symptoms include nausea, vomiting, heartburn, loss of appetite, and feeling of fullness that lasts long after meals. Metoclopramide injection is also used to prevent nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy or that may occur after surgery. Metoclopramide injection is also sometimes used to empty the intestines during certain medical procedures. Metoclopramide injection is in a class of medications called prokinetic agents. It works by speeding the movement of food through the stomach and intestines.
How should this medicine be used?
Metoclopramide injection comes as a liquid to be injected into a muscle or into a vein. When metoclopramide injection is used to treat slowed stomach emptying due to diabetes, it may be given up to four times a day. When metoclopramide injection is used to prevent nausea and vomiting due to chemotherapy, it is usually given 30 minutes before the chemotherapy, then once every 2 hours for two doses, then once every 3 hours for three doses. Metoclopramide injection is also sometimes given during surgery. If you are injecting metoclopramide injection at home, inject it at around the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use metoclopramide injection exactly as directed. Do not inject more or less of it or inject it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
Metoclopramide injection is also sometimes used to relieve nausea and vomiting caused by migraine headaches. Talk to your doctor about the risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving metoclopramide injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to metoclopramide injection, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in metoclopramide injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving metoclopramide injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects..
the following nonprescription products may interact with metoclopramide injection: allergy medications (diphenhydramine, loratadine, fexofenadine, chlorpheniramine, or cetirizine). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start receiving metoclopramide injection. Do not start any of these medications while taking metoclopramide injection without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had blockage or bleeding in your stomach or intestines, pheochromocytoma (tumor on a small gland near the kidneys); or seizures. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take metoclopramide.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had Parkinson's disease (PD; a disorder of the nervous system that causes difficulties with movement, muscle control, and balance); high blood pressure; depression; breast cancer; asthma;glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6PD) deficiency (an inherited blood disorder); NADH cytochrome B5 reductase deficiency (an inherited blood disorder); or heart, liver, or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while receiving metoclopramide injection, call your doctor.
talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of receiving metoclopramide injection if you are 65 years of age or older. Older adults should not usually receive metoclopramide injection, unless it is used to treat slow stomach emptying, because it is not as safe or effective as other medications that can be used to treat those conditions.
you should know that metoclopramide injection may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are receiving metoclopramide injection. Alcohol can make the side effects from metoclopramide injection worse.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
If you are injecting metoclopramide injection at home, inject the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not inject a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Metoclopramide injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
drowsiness
excessive tiredness
weakness
headache
dizziness
restlessness
nervousness or jitteriness
agitation
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
pacing
foot tapping
slow or stiff movements
blank facial expression
diarrhea
nausea
breast enlargement or discharge
missed menstrual period
decreased sexual ability
frequent urination
urinary incontinence
flushing
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, call your doctor immediately:
tightening of the muscles, especially in the jaw or neck
speech problems
depression
thinking about harming or killing yourself
fever
muscle stiffness
confusion
fast, slow, or irregular heartbeat
sweating
seizures
rash
hives
swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, mouth, throat, arms, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
difficulty breathing or swallowing
high-pitched sounds while breathing
vision problems
Metoclopramide injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Your healthcare provider will tell you how to store your medication. Store your medication only as directed. Make sure you understand how to store your medication properly.
Keep your supplies in a clean, dry place that is out of the reach of children when you are not using them. Your healthcare provider will tell you how to dispose of used needles, syringes, tubing, and containers to avoid accidental injury.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
drowsiness
confusion
unusual, uncontrollable movements
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist if you have any questions about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Reglan
®
I.V.
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page