Clarithromycin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Clarithromycin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a692005.html
Clarithromycin
pronounced as (kla rith' roe mye sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Clarithromycin is used to treat certain bacterial infections, such as pneumonia (a lung infection), bronchitis (infection of the tubes leading to the lungs), and infections of the ears, sinuses, skin, and throat. It also is used to treat and prevent disseminated
Mycobacterium avium
complex (MAC) infection [a type of lung infection that often affects people with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)]. It is used in combination with other medications to eliminate
H. pylori
, a bacterium that causes ulcers. Clarithromycin is in a class of medications called macrolide antibiotics. It works by stopping the growth of bacteria.
Antibiotics such as clarithromycin will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Taking antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Clarithromycin comes as a tablet, an extended-release (long-acting) tablet, and a suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. The regular tablet and liquid are usually taken with or without food every 8 (three times a day) to 12 hours (twice a day) for 7 to 14 days. The extended-release tablet is usually taken with food every 24 hours (once a day) for 7 to 14 days. Your doctor may tell you to take clarithromycin for a longer time depending on your condition. Take clarithromycin at around the same time(s) every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take clarithromycin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the suspension well before each use to mix the medication evenly.
Swallow the long-acting tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
You should begin to feel better during the first few days of treatment with clarithromycin. If your symptoms do not improve or get worse, call your doctor.
Take clarithromycin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking clarithromycin too soon, or skip doses, your infection may not be completely treated and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
Clarithromycin also is used sometimes to treat other types of infections including Lyme disease (an infection that may develop after a person is bitten by a tick), cryptosporidiosis (an infection that causes diarrhea), cat scratch disease (an infection that may develop after a person is bitten or scratched by a cat), Legionnaires' disease, (type of lung infection), and pertussis (whooping cough; a serious infection that can cause severe coughing). It is also sometimes used to prevent heart infection in patients having dental or other procedures. Talk to your doctor about the possible risks of using this medication for your condition.
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking clarithromycin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to clarithromycin, azithromycin (Zithromax, Zmax), erythromycin (E.E.S., Eryc, Erythrocin, PCE, others), telithromycin (not available in U.S.; Ketek), any other medications, or any of the ingredients in clarithromycin preparations. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
some medications should not be taken with clarithromycin. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with clarithromycin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting clarithromycin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking clarithromycin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had jaundice (yellowing of the skin or eyes) or other liver problems while taking clarithromycin. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take clarithromycin.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with clarithromycin: St. John's wort; omeprazole (Prilosec). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking clarithromycin. Do not start any of these medications while taking clarithromycin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a prolonged QT interval (a rare heart problem that may cause fainting or irregular heartbeat), ventricular arrhythmia (abnormal heart rhythms), a low level of magnesium or potassium in your blood, myasthenia gravis (MG; a disorder of the nervous system that causes muscle weakness), or if you have or have ever had an irregular heartbeat, coronary artery disease (narrowing of the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart), or kidney, or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking clarithromycin, call your doctor. Clarithromycin may harm the fetus.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking clarithromycin.
you should know that clarithromycin may make you dizzy, confused, or disoriented. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this medication affects you.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Clarithromycin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
stomach pain
heartburn
gas
change in taste
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
chest pain, shortness of breath, trouble breathing, pain or weakness in side of your body, or slurred speech
severe diarrhea with watery or bloody stools (up to 2 months after your treatment)
rash
hives
itching
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
difficulty breathing or swallowing
hoarseness
peeling or blistering skin
fever
yellowing of the skin or eyes
extreme tiredness
unusual bleeding or bruising
lack of energy
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
dark-colored urine
flu-like symptoms
fast, pounding, or irregular heartbeat
muscle weakness such as difficulty chewing, talking, or performing daily activities
double vision
Clarithromycin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store the tablets at room temperature and away from light, excess heat, and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not refrigerate the suspension. Keep it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture. Discard any unused suspension after 14 days.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
stomach pain
nausea
vomiting
diarrhea
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to clarithromycin.
The extended-release tablet does not dissolve in the stomach after swallowing. It slowly releases the medication as it passes through your digestive system. You may notice the tablet coating in the stool. This is normal and does not mean that you did not get the full dose of medication.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the clarithromycin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Biaxin
®
Filmtab
®
Biaxin
®
Granules
Biaxin
®
XL Filmtab
Biaxin
®
XL Pac
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
06/15/2020
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page