Infigratinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Infigratinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a621041.html
Infigratinib
pronounced as (in" fig ra' ti nib)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Infigratinib is no longer commercially available in the U.S. See the FDA website (https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/) for information on drugs that have been discontinued.
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, this document is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Infigratinib is used in adults who have received previous therapy to treat a certain type of cholangiocarcinoma (bile duct cancer) that has spread to nearby tissues or other parts of the body and cannot be removed by surgery. Infigratinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the abnormal protein that signals cancer cells to multiply. This helps stop or slow the spread of cancer cells.
How should this medicine be used?
Infigratinib comes as a capsule to take by mouth. It is usually taken once daily on an empty stomach (at least 1 hour before or at least 2 hours after food) for the first 21 days of a 28-day cycle. The cycle may be repeated as recommended by your doctor. Take infigratinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take infigratinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the capsules whole with a glass of water; do not split, chew, dissolve, or open them.
If you vomit after taking infigratinib, do not take another dose. Continue your regular dosing schedule.
Your doctor may decrease your dose or temporarily or permanently stop your treatment if you experience certain side effects. This depends on how well the medication works for you and the side effects you experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling during your treatment with infigratinib.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking infigratinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to infigratinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in infigratinib capsules. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking infigratinib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
if you are taking antacids, such as aluminum hydroxide/magnesium hydroxide (Maalox), calcium carbonate (Tums), or calcium carbonate and magnesium (Rolaids), take infigratinib 2 hours before or 2 hours after you take the antacid. If you are taking H
2
blockers, such as cimetidine (Tagamet), famotidine (Pepcid), nizatidine (Axid), and ranitidine (Zantac), take infigratinib 2 hours before or 10 hours after you take the H
2
blocker.
the following nonprescription products may interact with infigratinib: proton pump inhibitors such as lansoprazole (Prevacid), omeprazole (Prilosec). Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking infigratinib. Do not start any of these medications while taking infigratinib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have vision or eye problems or if you have or ever had liver or kidney problems.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or if you plan on fathering a child. If you are female, you will need to take a pregnancy test before you start treatment and use birth control to prevent pregnancy during your treatment and for at least 1 month after your final dose. If you are a male, you and your partner should use birth control during your treatment and for 1 month after your final dose. Talk to your doctor about birth control methods that you can use during your treatment. If you or your partner become pregnant while taking infigratinib, call your doctor immediately. Infigratinib may harm the fetus.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while you are taking infigratinib and for 1 month after your final dose.
you should know that this medication may cause dry eyes. Your doctor may tell you to use artificial tears or lubricant eye drops during your treatment with infigratinib.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Do not drink grapefruit juice or eat grapefruit while taking this medication.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it, with a meal. However, if it has been more than 4 hours since your last dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Infigratinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
nausea
vomiting
constipation
loss of appetite
changes in taste
heartburn or indigestion
stomach pain
sores on the lips, mouth, or throat
dry mouth and/or skin
nail disorders
hair loss
headache
fatigue
swelling of hands, feet, legs or ankles
pain in joints, arms, or legs
nose bleeds
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms , call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
blurred vision, floaters in the eye, seeing flashes of light, or other changes in vision
muscle cramps, numbness, or tingling around the mouth
fever, chills, or other signs of infection
blistering and peeling skin
Infigratinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order a lab test before you begin your treatment to see whether your cancer can be treated with infigratinib. Your doctor will also order certain lab and eye tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to infigratinib.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Truseltiq
®
Last Revised -
06/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page