Nitrofurantoin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Nitrofurantoin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682291.html
Nitrofurantoin
pronounced as (nye troe fyoor an' toyn)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Nitrofurantoin is used to treat urinary tract infections. Nitrofurantoin is in a class of medications called antibiotics. It works by killing bacteria that cause infection.
Antibiotics such as nitrofurantoin will not work for colds, flu, or other viral infections. Using antibiotics when they are not needed increases your risk of getting an infection later that resists antibiotic treatment.
How should this medicine be used?
Nitrofurantoin comes as a capsule and a suspension (liquid) to take by mouth. Nitrofurantoin usually is taken with food two or four times a day for at least 7 days. Try to take nitrofurantoin at the same times every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take nitrofurantoin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Shake the liquid well before each use to mix the medication evenly. Use a dose-measuring spoon or cup to measure the correct amount of liquid for each dose; not a household spoon.
You should begin to feel better during your first few days of treatment with nitrofurantoin. If your symptoms do not improve or if they get worse, call your doctor.
Take nitrofurantoin until you finish the prescription, even if you feel better. If you stop taking nitrofurantoin too soon or if you skip doses, your infection may be more difficult to treat and the bacteria may become resistant to antibiotics.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses. Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking nitrofurantoin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to nitrofurantoin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in nitrofurantoin capsules or suspension (liquid). Ask your doctor or pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking nitrofurantoin. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
the following nonprescription products may interact with nitrofurantoin: antacids. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking nitrofurantoin. Do not start any of these medications while taking nitrofurantoin without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have ever had kidney disease or if you have ever had jaundice (yellowing of the skin or eyes) or other liver problems while taking nitrofurantoin. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take nitrofurantoin.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had anemia, diabetes, lung problems, nerve damage, an electrolyte imbalance in your blood, low levels of vitamin B in your body, or glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G-6-PD) deficiency (an inherited blood disease).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking nitrofurantoin, call your doctor. Nitrofurantoin may cause problems in newborns following delivery if it is taken during the last month of pregnancy. Nitrofurantoin should not be taken by women in the last month of pregnancy.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and take any remaining doses for that day at evenly spaced intervals. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Nitrofurantoin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
loss of appetite
heartburn or gas
hair loss
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash
hives
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the eyes, face, mouth, lips, tongue, or throat
fever or chills
chest pain
persistent cough
numbness, tingling, or pinprick sensation in the fingers and toes
muscle weakness
yellowing of the skin or eyes, dark urine, loss of appetite, fatigue, or pain or discomfort in right upper stomach area
confusion
dizziness
paleness
severe diarrhea (watery or bloody stools) that may occur with or without fever and stomach cramps (may occur up to 2 months or more after your treatment)
eye pain or vision changes
Nitrofurantoin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while you are taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your response to nitrofurantoin.
If you have diabetes and your doctor has told you to test your urine for glucose (sugar), tell the doctor that you are taking nitrofurantoin. Nitrofurantoin can cause false results on urine tests for glucose.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Your prescription is probably not refillable. If you still have symptoms of infection after you finish the nitrofurantoin, call your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Furadantin
®
Tablets
¶
Furadantin
®
Oral Suspension
Furalan
®
¶
Macrobid
®
Macrodantin
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
01/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page