Triamcinolone Nasal Spray: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Triamcinolone Nasal Spray
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682791.html
Triamcinolone Nasal Spray
pronounced as (trye'' am sin' oh lone)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Triamcinolone nasal spray is used to relieve sneezing, runny, stuffy, or itchy nose and itchy, watery eyes caused by hay fever or other allergies. Triamcinolone nasal spray should not be used to treat symptoms (e.g., sneezing, stuffy, runny, or itchy nose) caused by the common cold. Triamcinolone is in a class of medications called corticosteroids. It works by blocking the release of certain natural substances that cause allergy symptoms.
How should this medicine be used?
Triamcinolone comes as a liquid (prescription and nonprescription) to spray in the nose. It is usually sprayed in each nostril once daily. If you are an adult, you will begin your treatment with a higher dose of triamcinolone nasal spray and then decrease your dose when your symptoms improve. If you are giving triamcinolone nasal spray to a child, treatment will begin with a lower dose of the medication and then the dose may increase if the child's symptoms do not improve. You will decrease the dose when the child's symptoms improve. Follow the directions on the package or product label carefully and ask your doctor or pharmacist if you have any questions. Use triamcinolone spray exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than directed on the package label or prescribed by your doctor.
An adult should help children under 12 years old to use triamcinolone nasal spray. Children younger than 2 years of age should not use this medication.
Triamcinolone nasal spray is only for use in the nose. Do not swallow the nasal spray and be careful not to spray it in your eyes. If you accidentally get triamcinolone nasal spray in your eyes, rinse your eyes well with water.
Each bottle of triamcinolone nasal spray should only be used by one person. Do not share triamcinolone nasal spray because this may spread germs.
Triamcinolone nasal spray controls the symptoms of hay fever and allergies but does not cure these conditions. Your symptoms may improve on the day that you begin using triamcinolone nasal spray, but it may take up to 1 week of daily use before you feel the full benefit of this medication. If you use the prescription triamcinolone nasal spray daily and your symptoms do not improve after 3 weeks, call your doctor. If you use the nonprescription triamcinolone nasal spray daily and your symptoms do not improve after 1 week, call your doctor.
Triamcinolone nasal spray is designed to provide a certain number of sprays. After the marked number of sprays have been used, the remaining sprays in the bottle might not contain the correct amount of medication. You should keep track of the number of sprays you have used and dispose of the bottle after you have used the marked number of sprays even if it still contains some liquid.
To use the nasal spray, follow these steps:
Remove the cap from the bottle and shake the bottle gently.
If you are using the pump for the first time you must prime the pump. Press and release the nozzle to release 5 sprays into the air away from the face. If you have not used it for 2 weeks or longer, press and release 1 spray into the air away from the face.
Gently blow your nose until your nostrils are clear. A small child may need help to gently blow his or her nose.
Remove the bottle cap and gently shake the bottle.
Hold the pump with the applicator between your forefinger and middle finger and the bottom resting on your thumb.
Press one finger on the other hand against the side of one of your nostrils to hold it closed.
Put the spray tip into your other nostril. Aim the tip toward the back of your nose, but do not push the tip deep into your nose. Do not point the tip toward your nasal septum (divider between your nostrils).
Sniff gently. While you are sniffing, use your forefinger and middle finger to press firmly down on the applicator and release a spray.
If you are using 2 sprays, repeat steps 6 to 8.
Repeat steps 6 to 8 in the other nostril.
Do not blow your nose for 15 minutes after using the spray.
Wipe the applicator with a clean tissue and cover it with the cap.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using triamcinolone nasal spray,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to triamcinolone, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in triamcinolone nasal spray. Check the package label for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have tuberculosis (TB; a type of lung infection), chicken pox, or measles, or if you have been around someone who has one of these conditions. Also tell your doctor if you have a herpes infection of the eye (an infection that causes a sore on the eyelid or eye surface), any other type of infection, if you have or have ever had cataracts (clouding of the lens of the eye), or glaucoma (an eye disease). Also tell your doctor if you have recently had surgery on your nose, or injured your nose in any way or if you have sores in your nose.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using triamcinolone nasal spray, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Use the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not use a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Triamcinolone nasal spray may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if either of these symptoms is severe or does not go away:
headache
heartburn
diarrhea
stomach pain
teeth problems
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop using triamcinolone nasal spray and call your doctor:
vision problems
fever, sore throat, chills, cough, and other signs of infection
severe or frequent nosebleeds
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
You should know that this medication may cause children to grow slowly. Talk to your child's doctor if your child needs to use this medication for more than 2 months per year.
Triamcinolone may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
If someone swallows triamcinolone nasal spray, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222. If the victim has collapsed or is not breathing, call local emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
You will need to clean your triamcinolone nasal spray applicator periodically. You will need to remove the cap and then pull on the applicator to remove it from the bottle. Soak the cap and spray nozzle in warm water for a few minutes, and then rinse under cold water. Shake or tap off the excess water and allow to air dry. Once the cap and spray nozzle are dry, put the nozzle back onto the bottle. Press and release the nozzle until you see a fine spray.
If your bottle will not spray, the nozzle may be blocked. Do not use pins or other sharp objects to try to remove the blockage with. Instead, clean the spray applicator as directed.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about triamcinolone nasal spray.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nasacort
®
Allergy 24HR
Nasacort
®
AQ Nasal Spray
®
¶
Allernaze
®
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
03/15/2022
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page