Flavoxate: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Flavoxate
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682706.html
Flavoxate
pronounced as (fla vox' ate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Flavoxate is used to treat overactive bladder (a condition in which the bladder muscles contract uncontrollably and cause frequent urination, urgent need to urinate, and inability to control urination) relieve painful, frequent, or nighttime urination and urgency that may occur with infections of the prostate, bladder, or kidneys. Flavoxate is in a class of medications called antimuscarinics. It works by relaxing the bladder muscles. However, flavoxate is not an antibiotic; it does not cure infections.
How should this medicine be used?
Flavoxate comes as a tablet. Flavoxate usually is taken three or four times a day. This drug may be taken with or without food. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take flavoxate exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication is sometimes prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking flavoxate,
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had glaucoma, ulcers, paralytic ileus, or obstructive disease (blockage) of the stomach, kidneys, or intestines.
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to flavoxate or any other drugs.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking flavoxate, call your doctor.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking flavoxate.
you should know that this drug may make you drowsy. Do not drive a car or operate machinery until you know how this drug affects you.
remember that alcohol can add to the drowsiness caused by this drug.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Flavoxate may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
vomiting
upset stomach
dry mouth or throat
blurred vision
eye pain
increased sensitivity of your eyes to light
If you experience any of the following symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
confusion (especially in the elderly)
skin rash
fast or irregular heartbeat
severe dizziness or drowsiness
sore throat with fever
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Urispas
®
¶
¶
This branded product is no longer on the market. Generic alternatives may be available.
Last Revised -
09/15/2017
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page