Talc Intrapleural: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Talc Intrapleural
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a608011.html
Talc Intrapleural
pronounced as (talk)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Talc is used to prevent malignant pleural effusion (buildup of fluid in the chest cavity in people who have cancer or other serious illnesses) in people who have already had this condition. Talc is in a class of medications called sclerosing agents. It works by irritating the lining of the chest cavity so that the cavity closes and there is no space for fluid.
How should this medicine be used?
Talc comes as a powder to be mixed with liquid and placed in the chest cavity through a chest tube (plastic tube that is placed in the chest cavity through a cut in the skin), and as an aerosol to be sprayed through a tube into the chest cavity during surgery. Talc is given by a doctor in a hospital.
After your doctor places talc in your chest cavity, you may be asked to change positions every 20-30 minutes for several hours to allow the talc to spread through your chest cavity.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving talc,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to talc or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had any other medical conditions.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant after receiving talc, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Talc may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if either of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
pain
bleeding in the area where the chest tube was inserted
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fever
shortness of breath
coughing up blood
fast heartbeat
chest pain or pressure
dizziness
fainting
Talc may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems after you receive this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Sclerosal
®
Last Revised -
02/11/2012
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page