Darunavir, Cobicistat, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Alafenamide: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Darunavir, Cobicistat, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Alafenamide
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a618045.html
Darunavir, Cobicistat, Emtricitabine, and Tenofovir Alafenamide
pronounced as (da roon' a veer) (koe bik' i stat)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide (AF) should not be used to treat hepatitis B virus infection (HBV; an ongoing liver infection). Tell your doctor if you have or think you may have HBV. Your doctor may test you to see if you have HBV before you begin and during your treatment with darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF. If you have HBV and you take darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF, your condition may suddenly worsen when you stop taking this medication. Your doctor will examine you and order lab tests regularly for several months after you stop taking this medication.
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain tests before and during your treatment to check your body's response to darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF.
Talk to your doctor about the risks of taking darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF.
Why is this medication prescribed?
The combination of darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF is used to treat human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. The combination of darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF is in a class of medications called antivirals. Darunavir, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF work by decreasing the amount of HIV in the blood. Cobicistat helps to keep darunavir in the body longer so that the medication will have a greater effect.
Although the combination of darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF will not cure HIV, these medications may decrease your chance of developing acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and HIV-related illnesses. Taking these medications and making other lifestyle changes may decrease the risk of transmitting the HIV virus to other people.
How should this medicine be used?
The combination of darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take with food once a day. Take darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF at around the same time every day.
Take darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
If you have trouble swallowing the tablets, you can split them into two pieces with a tablet-cutter. Take the split tablets right after cutting them. Do not save them for future use.
The combination of darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF helps to control HIV infection but does not cure it. Continue to take darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF even if you feel well. Do not stop taking darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF without talking to your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this drug, any part of this drug, or any other drugs, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) such as ibuprofen (Advil
®
, Motrin
®
) and naproxen (Aleve
®
, Naprosyn
®
) and St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF. Do not start any of these medications while taking darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had the condition mentioned in the IMPORTANT WARNING section, any type of infection that does not go away or that comes and goes such as tuberculosis (TB; a type of lung infection) or cytomegalovirus (CMV; a viral infection that may cause symptoms in patients with weak immune systems); diabetes; hemophilia (a disease in which the blood does not clot normally); or liver or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding or plan to breastfeed. Some of the medication and HIV may be passed to your baby in your breast milk. Talk to your doctor about the risks of breastfeeding your baby if you are taking darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF.
you should be aware that your body fat may increase or move to different areas of your body, such as your upper back, neck (''buffalo hump''), breasts, and around your stomach. You may notice a loss of body fat from your face, legs, and arms.
you should know that while you are taking medications to treat HIV infection, your immune system may get stronger and begin to fight other infections that were already in your body. This may cause you to develop symptoms of those infections. If you have new or worsening symptoms during your treatment with darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF, be sure to tell your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
diarrhea
headache
stomach discomfort
gas
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms or those listed in the SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS sections, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
dark yellow or brown urine; light-colored bowel movements; loss of appetite; nausea; vomiting; right upper stomach-area pain; or yellow skin or eyes
increased or decreased urination
weakness; muscle pain; shortness of breath or fast breathing; stomach pain with nausea and vomiting; cold or blue hands and feet; dizziness, lightheadedness; or fast or abnormal heartbeat
sore throat; fever; chills; cough; and other signs of infection
severe rash or rash with one or more of the following: fever, muscle or joint aches, red or swollen eyes, blisters or peeling skin, mouth sores, or swelling of face or neck
Darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom). Do not remove the desiccant (drying agent) pouches from the container.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep a supply of darunavir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir AF on hand. Do not wait until you run out of medication to refill your prescription.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Symtuza
®
Last Revised -
07/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page