Oxytocin Injection: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Oxytocin Injection
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a682685.html
Oxytocin Injection
pronounced as (ox i toe' sin)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Oxytocin should not be used to induce labor (to help start the birth process in a pregnant woman), unless there is a valid medical reason. Talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of using this medication.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Oxytocin injection is used to begin or improve contractions during labor. Oxytocin also is used to reduce bleeding after childbirth. It also may be used along with other medications or procedures to end a pregnancy. Oxytocin is in a class of medications called oxytocic hormones. It works by stimulating uterine contractions.
How should this medicine be used?
Oxytocin comes as a solution (liquid) to be given intravenously (into a vein) or intramuscularly (into the muscle) by a doctor or healthcare provider in a hospital or clinic. If oxytocin injection is given to induce labor or to increase contractions, it is usually given intravenously with medical supervision in a hospital.
Your doctor may adjust your dose of oxytocin injection during your treatment, depending on your contraction pattern and on the side effects that you experience. Talk to your doctor about how you are feeling during your treatment with oxytocin injection.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before receiving oxytocin injection,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to oxytocin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in oxytocin injection. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you have genital herpes (a herpes virus infection that causes sores to form around the genitals and rectum from time to, time), placenta previa (placenta blocks the neck of the uterus) or other abnormal position of the fetus or umbilical cord, small pelvic structure cancer of the cervix, or toxemia (high blood pressure during pregnancy). Your doctor will probably not give you oxytocin injection.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had premature delivery, a Cesarean section (C-section), or any other uterine or cervical surgery.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while receiving oxytocin injection. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Follow your doctor's instructions about what to eat and drink while you are receiving this medication.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Oxytocin injection may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
vomiting
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
rash
hives
itching
difficulty breathing or swallowing
swelling of the face, throat, tongue, lips, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, or lower legs
fast heartbeat
unusual bleeding
Oxytocin injection may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while receiving this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include the following:
strong or prolonged uterine contractions
bleeding
seizures
loss of consciousness
What other information should I know?
Your doctor may order certain lab tests to check your body's response to oxytocin injection.
Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about oxytocin injection.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Pitocin
®
Last Revised -
11/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page