Bempedoic Acid: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Bempedoic Acid
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a620020.html
Bempedoic Acid
pronounced as (bem" pe doe' ik)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Brand names of combination products
Why is this medication prescribed?
Bempedoic acid is used together with lifestyle changes (diet, weight-loss, exercise) and certain cholesterol-lowering medications (HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors [statins]) to further decrease low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol ('bad cholesterol') in the blood of adults with familial heterozygous hypercholesterolemia (HeFH; an inherited condition in which cholesterol cannot be removed from the body normally) or heart disease. Bempedoic acid is also used to reduce the risk of heart attack and to decrease the chance that heart surgery will be needed in people who have heart disease or who are at risk of developing heart disease and who are not taking or cannot take HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) to lower their cholesterol. Bempedoic acid is in a class of medications called adenosine triphosphate-citrate lyase (ACL) inhibitors. It works by blocking the production of cholesterol in the liver.
How should this medicine be used?
Bempedoic acid comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once daily with or without food. Take bempedoic acid at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take bempedoic acid exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking bempedoic acid,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to bempedoic acid, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in bempedoic acid tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had gout, tendon (a fibrous tissue that connects a bone to a muscle) problems, gallbladder problems, or kidney or liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking bempedoic acid, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Bempedoic acid may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
muscle spasms
back pain
pain in hands or feet
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, stop taking bempedoic acid and call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
rash; flushing; hives; itching; swelling of the eyes, face, lips, tongue, or throat; difficulty breathing or swallowing; dizziness or fainting; or fast or pounding heartbeat
severe pain, redness, warmth, tenderness, or swelling of the joints, especially in the big toe area
hearing or feeling a snap or pop in a tendon area; bruising after an injury to a tendon area; or inability to move to or bear weight on affected tendon area
nausea, vomiting, or pain in the upper right part of the stomach
excessive tiredness, pale skin, dizziness, or shortness of breath
Bempedoic acid may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to bempedoic acid.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Nexletol
®
Brand names of combination products
Nexlizet
®
(containing Bempedoic Acid, Ezetimibe)
Last Revised -
05/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page