TRNT1 deficiency: MedlinePlus Genetics
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Genetics
→
Genetic Conditions
→
TRNT1 deficiency
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/trnt1-deficiency/
TRNT1 deficiency
Description
TRNT1 deficiency is a condition that affects many body systems. Its signs and symptoms can involve blood cells, the immune system, the eyes, and the nervous system. The severity of the signs and symptoms vary widely.
A common feature of TRNT1 deficiency is a blood condition called sideroblastic anemia, which is characterized by a shortage of red blood cells (
anemia
). In TRNT1 deficiency, the red blood cells that are present are unusually small (erythrocytic microcytosis). In addition, developing red blood cells in the bone marrow (erythroblasts) can have an abnormal buildup of iron that appears as a ring of blue staining in the cell after treatment in the lab with certain dyes. These abnormal cells are called ring sideroblasts.
Many people with TRNT1 deficiency have an immune system disorder (immunodeficiency) that can lead to recurrent bacterial infections. Repeated infections can cause life-threatening damage to internal organs. The immunodeficiency is characterized by low numbers of immune system cells called B cells, which normally help fight infections by producing immune proteins called antibodies (or immunoglobulins). These proteins target foreign invaders such as bacteria and viruses and mark them for destruction. In many individuals with TRNT1 deficiency, the amount of immunoglobulins is also low (hypogammaglobulinemia).
In addition, many individuals with TRNT1 deficiency have recurrent fevers that are not caused by an infection. These fever episodes are often one of the earliest recognized symptoms of TRNT1 deficiency, usually beginning in infancy. The fever episodes are typically accompanied by poor feeding, vomiting, and diarrhea, and can lead to hospitalization. In many affected individuals, the episodes occur regularly, arising approximately every 2 to 4 weeks and lasting 5 to 7 days, although the frequency can decrease with age.
Eye abnormalities, often involving the light-sensing tissue at the back of the eye (the
retina
), can occur in people with TRNT1 deficiency. Some of these individuals have a condition called
retinitis pigmentosa
, in which the light-sensing cells of the retina gradually deteriorate. Eye problems in TRNT1 deficiency can lead to vision loss.
Neurological problems are also frequent in TRNT1 deficiency. Many affected individuals have delayed development of speech and motor skills, such as sitting, standing, and walking, and some have low muscle tone (hypotonia).
Features that occur less commonly in people with TRNT1 deficiency include hearing loss caused by abnormalities of the
inner ear
(sensorineural hearing loss), recurrent seizures (epilepsy), and problems with the kidneys or heart.
TRNT1 deficiency encompasses what was first thought to be two separate disorders, a severe disorder called sideroblastic anemia with B-cell immunodeficiency, periodic fevers, and developmental delay (SIFD) and a milder disorder called retinitis pigmentosa with erythrocytic microcytosis (RPEM), each named for its most common features. SIFD begins in infancy, and affected individuals usually do not survive past childhood. RPEM, on the other hand, is recognized in early adulthood, and the microcytosis usually does not cause any health problems. However, it has since been recognized that some individuals have a combination of features that fall between these two ends of the severity spectrum. All of these cases are now considered part of TRNT1 deficiency.
Frequency
TRNT1 deficiency is a rare condition; its prevalence is unknown. Approximately 20 affected individuals have been described in the medical literature.
Causes
TRNT1 deficiency is caused by mutations in the
TRNT1
gene, which provides instructions for making a protein involved in the production (synthesis) of other proteins. During protein synthesis, a molecule called
transfer RNA
(tRNA) helps assemble protein building blocks (
amino acids
) into a chain that forms the protein. Each tRNA carries a specific amino acid to the growing chain. The TRNT1 protein modifies tRNAs, which allows the correct amino acid to be attached to each tRNA.
TRNT1
gene mutations lead to a shortage (deficiency) of functional TRNT1 protein. As a result, modification of tRNA molecules is impaired. Without the modification, tRNAs are thought to be less able to participate in protein synthesis. Researchers suspect that protein synthesis in cellular structures called
mitochondria
, which are the energy-producing centers of cells, is most strongly affected. The resulting decrease in energy production may damage cells in many body systems, leading to the varied signs and symptoms of TRNT1 deficiency. Researchers believe that mutations that cause a greater impairment of TRNT1 function lead to more severe signs and symptoms.
Learn more about the gene associated with TRNT1 deficiency
TRNT1
Inheritance
This condition is inherited in an
autosomal recessive pattern
, which means both copies of the gene in each cell have mutations. The parents of an individual with an autosomal recessive condition each carry one copy of the mutated gene, but they typically do not show signs and symptoms of the condition.
Other Names for This Condition
Retinitis pigmentosa with erythrocytic microcytosis
RPEM
Sideroblastic anemia with B-cell immunodeficiency, periodic fevers, and developmental delay
SIFD
TRNT1 enzyme deficiency
TRNT1-related immunodeficiency
TRNT1-related immunodeficiency+
Additional Information & Resources
Genetic Testing Information
Genetic Testing Registry: Congenital sideroblastic anemia-B-cell immunodeficiency-periodic fever-developmental delay syndrome
Genetic Testing Registry: Retinitis pigmentosa and erythrocytic microcytosis
Patient Support and Advocacy Resources
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD)
Catalog of Genes and Diseases from OMIM
SIDEROBLASTIC ANEMIA WITH B-CELL IMMUNODEFICIENCY, PERIODIC FEVERS, AND DEVELOPMENTAL DELAY; SIFD
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA AND ERYTHROCYTIC MICROCYTOSIS; RPEM
Scientific Articles on PubMed
PubMed
References
Chakraborty PK, Schmitz-Abe K, Kennedy EK, Mamady H, Naas T, Durie D, Campagna
DR, Lau A, Sendamarai AK, Wiseman DH, May A, Jolles S, Connor P, Powell C, Heeney
MM, Giardina PJ, Klaassen RJ, Kannengiesser C, Thuret I, Thompson AA, Marques L,
Hughes S, Bonney DK, Bottomley SS, Wynn RF, Laxer RM, Minniti CP, Moppett J,
Bordon V, Geraghty M, Joyce PB, Markianos K, Rudner AD, Holcik M, Fleming MD.
Mutations in TRNT1 cause congenital sideroblastic anemia with immunodeficiency,
fevers, and developmental delay (SIFD). Blood. 2014 Oct 30;124(18):2867-71. doi:
10.1182/blood-2014-08-591370. Epub 2014 Sep 5.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
DeLuca AP, Whitmore SS, Barnes J, Sharma TP, Westfall TA, Scott CA, Weed MC,
Wiley JS, Wiley LA, Johnston RM, Schnieders MJ, Lentz SR, Tucker BA, Mullins RF,
Scheetz TE, Stone EM, Slusarski DC. Hypomorphic mutations in TRNT1 cause
retinitis pigmentosa with erythrocytic microcytosis. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Jan
1;25(1):44-56. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv446. Epub 2015 Oct 22.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Frans G, Moens L, Schaballie H, Wuyts G, Liston A, Poesen K, Janssens A, Rice
GI, Crow YJ, Meyts I, Bossuyt X. Homozygous N-terminal missense mutation in TRNT1
leads to progressive B-cell immunodeficiency in adulthood. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2017 Jan;139(1):360-363.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.06.050. Epub 2016
Aug 13. No abstract available.
Citation on PubMed
Hull S, Malik AN, Arno G, Mackay DS, Plagnol V, Michaelides M, Mansour S,
Albanese A, Brown KT, Holder GE, Webster AR, Heath PT, Moore AT. Expanding the
Phenotype of TRNT1-Related Immunodeficiency to Include Childhood Cataract and
Inner Retinal Dysfunction. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2016 Sep 1;134(9):1049-53. doi:
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2015.5833.
Citation on PubMed
Liwak-Muir U, Mamady H, Naas T, Wylie Q, McBride S, Lines M, Michaud J, Baird
SD, Chakraborty PK, Holcik M. Impaired activity of CCA-adding enzyme TRNT1
impacts OXPHOS complexes and cellular respiration in SIFD patient-derived
fibroblasts. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2016 Jun 18;11(1):79. doi:
10.1186/s13023-016-0466-3.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Wedatilake Y, Niazi R, Fassone E, Powell CA, Pearce S, Plagnol V, Saldanha JW,
Kleta R, Chong WK, Footitt E, Mills PB, Taanman JW, Minczuk M, Clayton PT, Rahman
S. TRNT1 deficiency: clinical, biochemical and molecular genetic features.
Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2016 Jul 2;11(1):90. doi: 10.1186/s13023-016-0477-0.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Wiseman DH, May A, Jolles S, Connor P, Powell C, Heeney MM, Giardina PJ,
Klaassen RJ, Chakraborty P, Geraghty MT, Major-Cook N, Kannengiesser C, Thuret I,
Thompson AA, Marques L, Hughes S, Bonney DK, Bottomley SS, Fleming MD, Wynn RF. A
novel syndrome of congenital sideroblastic anemia, B-cell immunodeficiency,
periodic fevers, and developmental delay (SIFD). Blood. 2013 Jul 4;122(1):112-23.
doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-439083. Epub 2013 Apr 3.
Citation on PubMed
or
Free article on PubMed Central
Related Health Topics
Anemia
Genetic Disorders
Immune System and Disorders
Retinal Disorders
MEDICAL ENCYCLOPEDIA
Anemia
Genetics
Immunodeficiency disorders
Retinitis pigmentosa
Understanding Genetics
What is the prognosis of a genetic condition?
How can gene variants affect health and development?
What does it mean if a disorder seems to run in my family?
What are the different ways a genetic condition can be inherited?
How are genetic conditions treated or managed?
Disclaimers
MedlinePlus links to health information from the National Institutes of Health and other federal government agencies. MedlinePlus also links to health information from non-government Web sites. See our
disclaimer
about external links and our
quality guidelines
.
The information on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Contact a health care provider if you have questions about your health.
Learn how to cite this page