Polyethylene Glycol 3350: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Polyethylene Glycol 3350
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a603032.html
Polyethylene Glycol 3350
pronounced as (pol ee eth' i leen) (glye' col)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Other names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Polyethylene glycol 3350 is used to treat occasional constipation. Polyethylene glycol 3350 is in a class of medications called osmotic laxatives. It works by causing water to be retained with the stool. This increases the number of bowel movements and softens the stool so it is easier to pass.
How should this medicine be used?
Polyethylene glycol 3350 comes as a powder to be mixed with a liquid and taken by mouth. It is usually taken once a day as needed for up to 2 weeks. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take polyethylene glycol 3350 exactly as directed.
Polyethylene glycol 3350 may be habit-forming. Do not take a larger dose, take it more often, or take it for a longer period of time than your doctor tells you to.
It may take 2 to 4 days for polyethylene glycol 3350 to produce a bowel movement.
To use the powder, follow these steps:
If you are using polyethylene glycol 3350 from a bottle, use the measuring line on the bottle cap to measure a single dose (about 1 heaping tablespoon). If you are using polyethylene glycol 3350 packets, each packet contains a single dose.
Pour the powder into a cup containing 8 ounces (240 milliliters) of water, juice, soda, coffee, or tea.
Stir to dissolve the powder.
Drink immediately.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking polyethylene glycol 3350,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to polyethylene glycol or any other medications.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had a bowel obstruction (blockage in the intestine) and if you have symptoms of bowel obstruction (upset stomach, vomiting, and stomach pain or bloating).
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking polyethylene glycol 3350, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Eat a well-balanced diet that includes fiber-rich foods, such as unprocessed bran, whole-grain bread, and fresh fruits and vegetables. Drink plenty of fluids and exercise regularly.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
This medication is usually taken as needed.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Polyethylene glycol 3350 may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
nausea
bloating
cramping
gas
Some side effects can be serious. The following symptoms are uncommon, but if you experience either of them, call your doctor immediately:
diarrhea
hives
Polyethylene glycol 3350 may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
Symptoms of overdose may include:
diarrhea
thirst
confusion
seizure
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
MiraLax
®
Other names
PEG 3350
Last Revised -
03/15/2016
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page