Sebetralstat: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Sebetralstat
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a625087.html
Sebetralstat
pronounced as ( se'' be tral’ stat)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Sebetralstat is used to treat sudden attacks of hereditary angioedema (HAE; genetic condition causing recurrent severe swelling episodes). Sebetralstat is in a class of medications called plasma kallikrein inhibitors. It works by blocking a certain substance in the body that is responsible for producing the symptoms of angioedema.
How should this medicine be used?
Sebetralstat comes as a tablet to take by mouth. Take at the first sign of a HAE attack. A second dose may be taken 3 hours later if your symptoms do not improve, worsen, or return.
Carefully follow the instructions to remove sebetralstat tablets from the package. First push through the cardboard half circle. Then flip over the package and peel the back tab. Push the tablet through the foil.
Take sebetralstat exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking sebetralstat,
tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are allergic to this medication, any part of this medication, or any other medications, foods or substances. Tell your doctor or pharmacist about the allergy and what symptoms you had.
some medications should not be taken with sebetralstat. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with sebetralstat. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting sebetralstat with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking sebetralstat, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breast-feeding. If you become pregnant while taking sebetralstat, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Talk to your doctor about eating grapefruit and drinking grapefruit juice while taking this medication.
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Sebetralstat may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
headache
Sebetralstat may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (
1-800-332-1088
).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at
1-800-222-1222
. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Ekterly
®
Last Revised -
08/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page