Rolapitant: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Rolapitant
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a615041.html
Rolapitant
pronounced as roe la' pi tant
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Rolapitant is used along with other medications to prevent nausea and vomiting that may occur several days after receiving certain chemotherapy medications. Rolapitant is in a class of medications called antiemetics. It works by blocking the action of neurokinin and substance P, natural substances in the brain that cause nausea and vomiting.
How should this medicine be used?
Rolapitant comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken as a single dose within 2 hours before the start of chemotherapy. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take rolapitant exactly as directed.
Do not take rolapitant more than once every 14 days.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking rolapitant,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to rolapitant, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in rolapitant tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor if you are taking thioridazine or pimozide (Orap). Your doctor will probably tell you not to take rolapitant if you are taking one or more of these medications.
some medications should not be taken with rolapitant. Other medications may cause dosing changes or extra monitoring when taken with rolapitant. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting rolapitant with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping, or changing any medications while taking rolapitant, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
the following herbal product may interact with rolapitant: dextromethorphan; St. John's wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking this medication before you start taking rolapitant. Do not start this medication while taking rolapitant without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have or have ever had liver disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while taking rolapitant, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Rolapitant should only be taken before chemotherapy as instructed by your doctor. It should not be taken on a regularly scheduled basis.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Rolapitant may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
hiccups
stomach pain
decreased appetite
dizziness
heartburn
mouth sores
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately:
fever, chills, sore throat, or other signs of an infection
Rolapitant may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else take your medication.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Varubi
®
Last Revised -
04/15/2018
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page