Ingenol Mebutate Topical: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Ingenol Mebutate Topical
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a613008.html
Ingenol Mebutate Topical
pronounced as (in' jen ol) (meb' ue tate)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
IMPORTANT WARNING:
Ingenol Mebutate is no longer commercially available in the U.S. See the FDA website (https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/) for information on drugs that have been discontinued
Because this drug is no longer available in the U.S. market, the material in this section is no longer updated by AHFS DI. If this drug is used in countries other than the U.S., it is essential that the manufacturers' labeling be consulted for more recently available information.
Why is this medication prescribed?
Ingenol mebutate gel is used to treat actinic keratosis (flat, scaly growths on the skin caused by too much sun exposure). Ingenol mebutate is in a class of medications called cytotoxic agents. It works by killing fast-growing cells such as the abnormal cells associated with actinic keratoses.
How should this medicine be used?
Ingenol mebutate comes as a 0.015% or 0.05% gel to apply to the skin. When ingenol mebutate gel is used to treat actinic keratosis on the face or scalp, the 0.015% gel is usually applied once a day for 3 days in a row. When ingenol mebutate gel is used to treat actinic keratosis on the trunk (torso), arms, hands, or legs, the 0.05% gel is usually applied once a day for 2 days in a row. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Use ingenol mebutate gel exactly as directed. Do not use more or less of it or use it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Ingenol mebutate gel should be used only on the skin. Do not apply ingenol mebutate gel in or near your eyes, mouth, or vagina. If you get ingenol mebutate gel in your eyes, flush them with large amounts of water right away, and get medical care as soon as possible.
Do not apply ingenol mebutate gel right after taking a shower or less than 2 hours before bedtime. After applying ingenol mebutate gel, avoid doing activities that cause a lot of sweating for at least 6 hours.
To use ingenol mebutate gel, follow these steps:
Remove the cap from a new tube of ingenol mebutate gel just before you are ready to use it.
Squeeze the gel from the tube onto your fingertip. Use just enough gel to cover the area your doctor has instructed you to treat. One tube contains enough gel to cover a skin area of about 2 inches by 2 inches.
Spread the gel evenly over only the skin area you are treating.
Wash your hands right away after applying the gel. Be careful not to touch your eyes before you wash your hands. If the area you are treating is on your hands, wash only the fingertip you used to apply the gel.
Safely throw away the tube in the household trash after a single use.
Allow the treated area to dry for 15 minutes. Do not wash or touch the treated area for at least 6 hours. Be careful not to get the gel on the skin of another area of your body or to touch another person with the treated area.
Do not cover the treated area with bandages or other dressings.
After 6 hours, the treated area can be washed with mild soap and water.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient and instructions for use.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before using ingenol mebutate gel,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to ingenol mebutate, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in ingenol mebutate gel. Ask your pharmacist or check the manufacturer's information for the patient for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Be sure to mention any other treatments for actinic keratosis.
tell your doctor if you have other skin problems, including side effects from other treatments or sunburn, in the area you will be treating. You should not use ingenol mebutate gel until your skin has healed.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant, plan to become pregnant, or are breastfeeding. If you become pregnant while using ingenol mebutate gel, call your doctor.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Apply the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not apply extra gel to make up for a missed dose.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Ingenol mebutate gel may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
redness, flaking, scaling, crusting, or swelling of the skin
pain, itching, or irritation of the treated skin
irritation of the nose and throat
headache
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
difficulty breathing or swallowing
feeling faint
throat tightness
swelling of the lips or tongue
rash
hives
itching
eye pain, swelling or drooping of your eyelids, or swelling around your eyes
blisters, pus, ulcers, or other sores on the skin
Ingenol mebutate gel may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while using this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it in the refrigerator; do not freeze ingenol mebutate gel.
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor.
Do not let anyone else use your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Picato
®
Last Revised -
05/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page