Pitavastatin: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pitavastatin
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a610018.html
Pitavastatin
pronounced as (pit a'' va stat' in)
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pitavastatin is used together with diet, weight-loss, and exercise to reduce the amount of fatty substances such as low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol ('bad cholesterol') in the blood and to increase the amount of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol ('good cholesterol') in adults. Pitavastatin is also used together with diet to decrease the amount of cholesterol and other fatty substances in the blood in teenagers and children 8 years of age and older who have familial heterozygous hypercholesterolemia (an inherited condition in which cholesterol cannot be removed from the body normally). Pitavastatin is in a class of medications called HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins). It works by slowing the production of cholesterol in the body to decrease the amount of cholesterol that may build up on the walls of the arteries and block blood flow to the heart, brain, and other parts of the body.
Accumulation of cholesterol and fats along the walls of your arteries (a process known as atherosclerosis) decreases blood flow and, therefore, the oxygen supply to your heart, brain, and other parts of your body. Lowering your blood level of cholesterol and fats with pitavastatin has been shown to prevent heart disease, angina (chest pain), strokes, and heart attacks.
How should this medicine be used?
Pitavastatin comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken once a day with or without food. Take pitavastatin at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take pitavastatin exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Your doctor may start you on a low dose of pitavastatin and gradually increase your dose, not more than once every 4 weeks.
Continue to take pitavastatin even if you feel well. Do not stop taking pitavastatin without talking to your doctor.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking pitavastatin,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pitavastatin, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pitavastatin tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
Some medications should not be taken with pitavastatin. Make sure you have discussed any medications you are currently taking or plan to take before starting pitavastatin with your doctor and pharmacist. Before starting, stopping or changing any medications while taking pitavastatin, please get the advice of your doctor or pharmacist.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what other prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
tell your doctor if you have or ever had liver disease. Your doctor may order laboratory tests to see how well your liver is working even if you do not think you have liver disease. Your doctor will probably tell you not to take pitavastatin if you have liver disease or if the tests show that you may be developing liver disease.
tell your doctor if you drink large amounts of alcohol, if you are 65 years of age or older, or if you have or have ever had seizures, muscle aches or weakness, impaired fasting glucose (pre-diabetes) or diabetes, or thyroid or kidney disease.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. If you become pregnant while taking pitavastatin, call your doctor immediately. Your doctor may tell you to stop taking pitavastatin if you are pregnant.
do not breastfeed while you are taking this medication.
if you are having surgery, tell the doctor that you are taking pitavastatin. If you are hospitalized due to serious injury or infection, tell the doctor treating you that you are taking pitavastatin.
ask your doctor about the safe use of alcoholic beverages while you are taking pitavastatin. Alcohol can increase the risk of serious side effects.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Eat a low-fat, low-cholesterol diet. Be sure to follow all exercise and dietary recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian. You can also visit the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) website for additional dietary information at
https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/chol/chol_tlc.pdf
.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it is almost time for the next dose, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pitavastatin may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
back pain
constipation
diarrhea
memory loss or forgetfulness
confusion
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms, call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical help:
muscle pain, tenderness, or weakness
fever
nausea
extreme tiredness
unusual bleeding or bruising
lack of energy
loss of appetite
pain in the upper right part of the stomach
yellowing of the skin or eyes
dark urine
flu-like symptoms
rash
itching
hives
Pitavastatin may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from light, excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor may order certain lab tests during your treatment, especially if you develop signs of liver damage.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking pitavastatin.
Pitavastatin may increase your blood sugar level. If you monitor your blood sugar (glucose) at home, call your doctor if your blood sugar is high. You should follow diet and exercise recommendations made by your doctor or dietitian.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Livalo
®
Zypitamag
®
Last Revised -
05/20/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page