Pirtobrutinib: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
Pirtobrutinib
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623012.html
Pirtobrutinib
Why is this medication prescribed?
How should this medicine be used?
Other uses for this medicine
What special precautions should I follow?
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
What should I do if I forget a dose?
What side effects can this medication cause?
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
In case of emergency/overdose
What other information should I know?
Brand names
Why is this medication prescribed?
Pirtobrutinib is used to treat mantle cell lymphoma (a fast-growing cancer that begins in the cells of the immune system) in adults that has returned or is unresponsive to other treatments. Pirtobrutinib is also used to treat chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL; a type of cancer that begins in the white blood cells) or small lymphocytic lymphoma (SLL; a type of cancer that begins mostly in the lymph nodes) in adults who have already been treated with at least two other chemotherapy medications. Pirtobrutinib is in a class of medications called kinase inhibitors. It works by blocking the action of the protein that signals cancer cells to multiply.
How should this medicine be used?
Pirtobrutinib comes as a tablet to take by mouth. It is usually taken with or without food once a day. Take pirtobrutinib at around the same time every day. Follow the directions on your prescription label carefully, and ask your doctor or pharmacist to explain any part you do not understand. Take pirtobrutinib exactly as directed. Do not take more or less of it or take it more often than prescribed by your doctor.
Swallow the tablets whole; do not split, chew, or crush them.
Your doctor may need to change your dose or tell you to stop taking pirtobrutinib based on side effects you may experience. Be sure to tell your doctor how you are feeling while taking the medicine. Do not stop taking the medicine until your doctor tells you to.
Ask your pharmacist or doctor for a copy of the manufacturer's information for the patient.
Other uses for this medicine
This medication may be prescribed for other uses; ask your doctor or pharmacist for more information.
What special precautions should I follow?
Before taking pirtobrutinib,
tell your doctor and pharmacist if you are allergic to pirtobrutinib, any other medications, or any of the ingredients in pirtobrutinib tablets. Ask your pharmacist for a list of the ingredients.
tell your doctor and pharmacist what prescription and nonprescription medications, vitamins, nutritional supplements, and herbal products you are taking or plan to take while taking pirtobrutinib. Your doctor may need to change the doses of your medications or monitor you carefully for side effects.
The following nonprescription or herbal products may interact with pirtobrutinib: St. John's Wort. Be sure to let your doctor and pharmacist know that you are taking these medications before you start taking pirtobrutinib. Do not start any of these medications while taking pirtobrutinib without discussing with your healthcare provider.
tell your doctor if you have an infection or have a condition or take medication that impacts your immune system, have or have ever had kidney disease, a bleeding disorder, used blood thinners, arrhythmia (abnormal heart rate or rhythm), cancer, or high blood pressure.
tell your doctor if you are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. You should not become pregnant while you are receiving pirtobrutinib. You will need to have a negative pregnancy test before you begin receiving this medication. Use effective birth control during your treatment with pirtobrutinib and for 1 week after your final dose. If you become pregnant while receiving pirtobrutinib, call your doctor.
tell your doctor if you are breastfeeding. You should not breastfeed while taking pirtobrutinib or for 1 week after your last dose.
if you are having surgery, including dental surgery, tell the doctor or dentist that you are taking pirtobrutinib.
plan to avoid unnecessary or prolonged exposure to sunlight and to wear protective clothing, sunglasses, and sunscreen. Pirtobrutinib may make increase your risk of skin cancer.
you should know that pirtobrutinib may increase your risk of certain infections. Your doctor will likely have you receive certain vaccines before starting pirtobrutinib and put you on some additional medications to prevent infection while receiving pirtobrutinib.
you should know that pirtobrutinib may increase the risk of getting certain types of cancers which, in addition to skin cancer, may include breast and tumors of the genital or urinary tract. Talk to your doctor about the risk of treatment with pirtobrutinib before starting this medication.
What special dietary instructions should I follow?
Unless your doctor tells you otherwise, continue your normal diet.
What should I do if I forget a dose?
Take the missed dose as soon as you remember it. However, if it has been more than 12 hours, skip the missed dose and continue your regular dosing schedule. Do not take a double dose to make up for a missed one.
What side effects can this medication cause?
Pirtobrutinib may cause side effects. Tell your doctor if any of these symptoms are severe or do not go away:
tiredness
headache
muscle, joint and bone pain
diarrhea
constipation
stomach pain
nausea
decreased appetite
numbness or tingling in your hands, feet, arms, or legs
rash
mouth sores
difficulty falling asleep or staying asleep
swelling
Some side effects can be serious. If you experience any of these symptoms call your doctor immediately or get emergency medical treatment:
fever, chills, cough, weakness, flu-like symptoms, or any other signs of infection
blood in your stools or stools that look like tar, pink or brown urine, unusual or unexpected bleeding, vomiting blood or vomit that looks like coffee grounds, coughing up blood or blood clots, increased bruising, dizziness, weakness, confusion, changes in speech, or headache that lasts a long time
fast or irregular heart rate, fainting, chest discomfort, shortness of breath
falling
memory problems
Pirtobrutinib may cause other side effects. Call your doctor if you have any unusual problems while taking this medication.
If you experience a serious side effect, you or your doctor may send a report to the Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program online (
https://www.fda.gov/Safety/MedWatch
) or by phone (1-800-332-1088).
What should I know about storage and disposal of this medication?
Keep this medication in the container it came in, tightly closed, and out of reach of children. Store it at room temperature and away from excess heat and moisture (not in the bathroom).
Keep all medication out of sight and reach of children as many containers are not child-resistant. Always lock safety caps. Place the medication in a safe location – one that is up and away and out of their sight and reach.
https://www.upandaway.org
Dispose of unneeded medications in a way so that pets, children, and other people cannot take them. Do not flush this medication down the toilet. Use a medicine take-back program. Talk to your pharmacist about take-back programs in your community. Visit the FDA's Safe Disposal of Medicines website
https://goo.gl/c4Rm4p
for more information.
In case of emergency/overdose
In case of overdose, call the poison control helpline at 1-800-222-1222. Information is also available online at
https://www.poisonhelp.org/help
. If the victim has collapsed, had a seizure, has trouble breathing, or can't be awakened, immediately call emergency services at 911.
What other information should I know?
Keep all appointments with your doctor and the laboratory. Your doctor will order certain lab tests to check your body's response to pirtobrutinib.
Before having any laboratory test, tell your doctor and the laboratory personnel that you are taking pirtobrutinib.
Do not let anyone else take your medication. Ask your pharmacist any questions you have about refilling your prescription.
Keep a written list of all of the prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines, vitamins, minerals, and dietary supplements you are taking. Bring this list with you each time you visit a doctor or if you are admitted to the hospital. You should carry the list with you in case of emergencies.
Brand names
Jaypirca
®
Last Revised -
02/15/2024
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page