RSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus) Vaccine: MedlinePlus Drug Information
Skip navigation
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
You Are Here:
Home
→
Drugs, Herbs and Supplements
→
RSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus) Vaccine
URL of this page: https://medlineplus.gov/druginfo/meds/a623035.html
RSV (Respiratory Syncytial Virus) Vaccine
Why get vaccinated?
What is RSV vaccine?
Who should get RSV vaccine and when?
Talk with your healthcare provider
What are the risks of a vaccine reaction?
What if there is a serious reaction?
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
How can I learn more?
Brand names
Why get vaccinated?
RSV vaccine can prevent disease caused by infection with Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV).
RSV disease refers to an infection of the lower respiratory tract caused by RSV. RSV is a common virus that causes mild, cold-like symptoms. However, RSV disease can be more serious in infants and older adults. Those older adults at higher risk of severe disease from RSV disease include those:
with chronic heart or lung diseases
with weakened immune systems
nursing home or long-term care facility residents
RSV is usually spread through direct contact with the virus such as droplets from another person's cough or sneeze contacting your eyes, nose or mouth. It can also be spread by touching a surface that has a virus on it, such as a doorknob, and then touching your face before washing your hands.
Mild symptoms of RSV disease typically resolve in a week or two and include the following:
runny nose
decrease in appetite
coughing
sneezing
fever
wheezing
In individuals at high risk of serious disease as previously described, RSV may cause shortness of breath and low oxygen levels or may also worsen chronic heart or lung disease, leading to a hospital stay and even potentially death.
What is RSV vaccine?
RSV vaccine helps protect against virus that causes RSV disease.
There are different types of RSV vaccines. The differences between the vaccines are based on how they are made and which individuals should receive them.
Who should get RSV vaccine and when?
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends a one-time dose for adults 75 years of age or older and also for adults 60–74 years of age who are at increased risk of severe RSV disease.
CDC also recommends that pregnant women receive seasonal (September to January in most of the United States) vaccination at 32 through 36 weeks gestational age to prevent RSV infections in infants younger than 6 months of age.
Talk with your healthcare provider
Tell your vaccination provider if the person getting the vaccine:
Has had an allergic reaction after a previous dose of RSV vaccine or has any severe, life-threatening allergies
In some cases, your health care provider may decide to postpone RSV vaccination until a future visit.
People with minor illnesses, such as a cold, may be vaccinated. People who are moderately or severely ill should usually wait until they recover before getting RSV vaccine.
Your health care provider can give you more information.
What are the risks of a vaccine reaction?
Side effects that have been reported with RSV vaccine include:
Redness, swelling, pain, or tenderness where the shot is given
fever
feeling tired
headache
nausea
diarrhea
muscle or joint pain
Serious neurologic reactions, including Guillan-Barre Syndrome (GBS), have been reported very rarely after RSV vaccine in clinical trials. In a study of adults 65 years of age and older an association between vaccination with RSV vaccine and development of GBS within 42 days was reported. Tell your provider if you have sudden weakness, tingling in the hands or feet, or pain.
People sometimes faint after medical procedures, including vaccination. Tell your provider if you feel dizzy or have vision changes or ringing in the ears.
As with any medicine, there is a very remote chance of a vaccine causing a severe allergic reaction, other serious injury, or death.
What if there is a serious reaction?
An allergic reaction could occur after the vaccinated person leaves the clinic. If you see signs of a severe allergic reaction (hives, swelling of the face and throat, difficulty breathing, a fast heartbeat, dizziness, or weakness), call
9-1-1
and get the person to the nearest hospital.
For other signs that concern you, call your health care provider.
Adverse reactions should be reported to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS). Your health care provider will usually file this report, or you can do it yourself. Visit the VAERS website at
https://www.vaers.hhs.gov
or call
1-800-822-7967
.
VAERS is only for reporting reactions, and VAERS staff does not give medical advice.
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program
The National Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP) is a federal program that was created to compensate people who may have been injured by certain vaccines. Claims regarding alleged injury or death due to vaccination have a time limit for filing, which may be as short as two years. Visit the VICP website at
https://www.hrsa.gov/vaccinecompensation
or call
1-800-338-2382
to learn about the program and about filing a claim.
How can I learn more?
Ask your healthcare provider. They can give you the vaccine package insert or suggest other sources of information.
Call your local or state health department.
Visit the website of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for vaccine package inserts and additional information at
https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/vaccines
.
Contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): call
1-800-232-4636
(
1-800-CDC-INFO
) or visit CDC's website at
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines
.
Brand names
Arexvy
®
Abrysvo
®
Last Revised -
03/15/2025
Browse Drugs and Medicines
Learn how to cite this page